
Brazil (</ref> and the most populous Roman Catholic-majority country.

Bounded by the Atlantic Ocean on the east, Brazil has a coastline of </ref> This unique environmental heritage positions Brazil at number one of 17 megadiverse countries, and is the subject of significant global interest, as environmental degradation through processes like deforestation has direct impacts on global issues like climate change and biodiversity loss.

The territory which would become known as Brazil was inhabited by numerous tribal nations prior to the landing in 1500 of explorer Pedro Álvares Cabral, who claimed the discovered land for the Portuguese Empire. Brazil remained a Portuguese colony until 1808 when the capital of the empire was transferred from Lisbon to Rio de Janeiro. In 1815, the colony was elevated to the rank of kingdom upon the formation of the United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarves. Independence was achieved in 1822 with the creation of the Empire of Brazil, a unitary state governed under a constitutional monarchy and a parliamentary system. The ratification of the first constitution in 1824 led to the formation of a bicameral legislature, now called the National Congress. Slavery was abolished in 1888. The country became a presidential republic in 1889 following a military coup d'état. An authoritarian military junta came to power 1964 Brazilian coup d'in 1964 and ruled until 1985, after which civilian governance resumed. Brazil's current constitution, formulated in 1988, defines it as a democratic federal republic.<ref name="Constituição"></ref>

A major non-NATO ally of the United States, Brazil is a regional and middle power,<ref name="SchaeferPoffenbarger2014"></ref> Brazil has the largest share of global wealth in South America and it is one of the world's major breadbaskets, being the largest producer of coffee for the last 150 years.<ref name="Neilson102" /> However, the country retains noticeable corruption, crime and social inequality. Brazil is a founding member of the United Nations, the G20, BRICS, Mercosul, Organization of American States, Organization of Ibero-American States and the Community of Portuguese Language Countries.

 Etymology 

The word "Brazil" likely comes from the Portuguese word for brazilwood, a tree that once grew plentifully along the Brazilian coast.<ref name="Fausto1999"></ref>

The official Portuguese name of the land, in original Portuguese records, was the "Land of the Holy Cross" (Terra da Santa Cruz),<ref name="Corporation1880"></ref>

In the Guaraní language, an official language of Paraguay, Brazil is called "Pindorama". This was the name the indigenous population gave to the region, meaning "land of the palm trees."<ref name="Herrera-Sobek2012"></ref>

 History 



 Pre-Cabraline era 

Image:Pinturas_Rupestres_-_Serra_da_Capivara_I.Rock art at Serra da Capivara National Park, one of the largest and oldest concentrations of prehistoric sites in the Americas.<ref></ref>

Some of the earliest human remains found in the Americas, Luzia Woman, were found in the area of Pedro Leopoldo, Minas Gerais and provide evidence of human habitation going back at least 11,000 years.<ref>About.com, http://gobrazil.about.com/od/ecotourismadventure/ss/Peter-Lund-Museum.htm </ref> 
The earliest pottery ever found in the Western Hemisphere was excavated in the Amazon basin of Brazil and radiocarbon dated to 8,000 years ago (6000 BC). The pottery was found near Santarém,Santarém and provides evidence that the tropical forest region supported a complex prehistoric culture.<ref name="Eighth Millennium Pottery from a Prehistoric Shell Midden in the Brazilian Amazon">Science Magazine, 13 December 1991 https://www.science.org/doi/abs/10.1126/science.254.5038.1621</ref> The Marajoara culture flourished on Marajó in the Amazon delta from AD 400 to 1400, developing sophisticated pottery, social stratification, large populations, mound building, and complex social formations such as chiefdoms.<ref name=Mann></ref>

Around the time of the Portuguese arrival, the territory of current day Brazil had an estimated indigenous population of 7 million people,<ref>

Before the arrival of the Europeans, the boundaries between these groups and their subgroups were marked by wars that arose from differences in culture, language and moral beliefs.<ref name="Fausto">

 Portuguese colonization 




Following the 1494 Treaty of Tordesillas, the land now called Brazil was claimed for the Portuguese Empire on 22 April 1500, with the arrival of the Portuguese fleet commanded by Pedro Álvares Cabral.<ref name="Boxer, p. 98">Boxer, p.&nbsp;98.</ref> The Portuguese encountered indigenous peoples divided into several ethnic societies, most of whom spoke languages of the Tupi–Guaraní family and fought among themselves.<ref name="Boxer, p.&nbsp;100">Boxer, p. 100.</ref> Though the first settlement was founded in 1532, colonization effectively began in 1534, when King John&nbsp;III of Portugal divided the territory into the fifteen private and autonomous Captaincy Colonies of Brazil.<ref>Boxer, pp.&nbsp;100–101.</ref><ref name="Skidmore, p.&nbsp;27">Skidmore, p.&nbsp;27.</ref>

However, the decentralized and unorganized tendencies of the captaincy colonies proved problematic, and in 1549 the Portuguese king restructured them into the Governorate General of Brazil in the city of Salvador,Salvador, which became the capital of a single and centralized Portuguese colony in South America.<ref name="Skidmore, p.&nbsp;27" /><ref>Boxer, p.&nbsp;101.</ref> In the first two centuries of colonization, Indigenous and European groups lived in constant war, establishing opportunistic alliances in order to gain advantages against each other.<ref>Meuwese, Mark "Brothers in Arms, Partners in Trade: Dutch-Indigenous Alliances in the Atlantic World, 1595–1674" Koninklijke Brill NV 2012  p. 300, [https://books.google.com/books?id=8jVig0ysnu8C&pg=PA300 View on Google Books]</ref> 

By the mid-16th century, cane sugar had become Brazil's most important export,<ref name="Boxer, p.&nbsp;100" /><ref>Skidmore, p.&nbsp;36.</ref> while slaves purchased in Sub-Saharan Africa in the slave market of Western Africa<ref>Richard Middleton and Anne Lombard "Colonial America: A History to 1763" Wiley-Blackwell Publishing 1st edition 1992 </ref>

By the end of the 17th century, sugarcane exports began to decline<ref>Boxer, p.&nbsp;164.</ref> and the discovery of gold by bandeirantes in the 1690s would become the new backbone of the colony's economy, fostering a Brazilian Gold Rush<ref>Boxer, pp.&nbsp;168, 170.</ref> which attracted thousands of new settlers to Brazil from Portugal and all Portuguese colonies around the world.<ref>Boxer, p.&nbsp;169.</ref> This increased level of immigration in turn caused some conflicts between newcomers and old settlers.<ref></ref>

Portuguese expeditions known as Bandeiras gradually Uti possidetis#The Brazilian frontier movement into Spanish-expanded Brazil's original colonial frontiers in South America to its approximately current borders.<ref> pp. 95 (Brazil) and 145, note 5 [https://books.google.com/books?id=BKKf4PYI-IIC&pg=PA145#v=onepage&q=tordesilha%20bandeira%20portugal%20brazil%20advance View on Google Books]</ref> In this era other European powers tried to colonize parts of Brazil, in incursions that the Portuguese had to fight, notably the French in Rio during the 1560s, in Maranhão during the 1610s, and the Dutch in Bahia and Pernambuco, during the Dutch–Portuguese War, after the end of Iberian Union.<ref>Bethell, Leslie "Colonial Brazil" Cambridge University Press 1987 pp. 19, 74, 86, 169–70</ref>

The Portuguese colonial administration in Brazil had two objectives that would ensure colonial order and the monopoly of Portugal's wealthiest and largest colony: to keep under control and eradicate all forms of slave rebellion and resistance, such as the Quilombo of Palmares,<ref>Schwartz, Stuart B. "Slaves, Peasants, and Rebels" Board of Trustees of the University of Illinois 1992  Chapter 4 [https://books.google.com/books?id=YTnY5h0NE3sC&pg=PA103 View on Google Books]</ref> and to repress all movements for autonomy or independence, such as the Minas Conspiracy.<ref>MacLachlan, Colin M. "A History of Modern Brazil: The Past Against the Future"; Scholarly Resources Inc. 2003 p. 3 [https://books.google.com/books?id=8m3RcnkKwJgC&pg=PA3 View on Google Books]</ref>

 Elevation to kingdom 



In late 1807, Spanish and Napoleonic forces threatened the security of continental Portugal, causing Prince Regent João, in the name of Queen Maria I, to move the royal court from Lisbon to Rio de Janeiro.<ref name="Boxer, p.&nbsp;213">Boxer, p.&nbsp;213</ref> There they established some of Brazil's first financial institutions, such as its local stock exchanges<ref>Marta Barcellos & Simone Azevedo; Histórias do Mercado de Capitais no Brasil ("Financial Markets' Histories in Brazil") (Portuguese) Campus Elsevier 2011  Introduction (by Ney Carvalho), Intro. p. xiv</ref> and its National Bank, additionally ending the Portuguese monopoly on Brazilian trade and opening Brazil to other nations. In 1809, in retaliation for being forced into exile, the Prince Regent ordered the Portuguese conquest of French Guiana.<ref>Bueno, p.&nbsp;145.</ref>

With the end of the Peninsular War in 1814, the courts of Europe demanded that Queen Maria I and Prince Regent João return to Portugal, deeming it unfit for the head of an ancient European monarchy to reside in a colony. In 1815, to justify continuing to live in Brazil, where the royal court had thrived for six years, the Crown established the United Kingdom of Portugal, Brazil and the Algarves, thus creating a pluricontinental transatlantic monarchic state.<ref name="Mosher2008"></ref> João VI departed for Lisbon. There he swore an oath to the new constitution, leaving his son, Prince Pedro de Alcântara, as Regent of the Kingdom of Brazil.<ref>Lustosa, pp.&nbsp;109–110</ref>

 Independent empire 


Tensions between Portuguese and Brazilians increased and the Portuguese Cortes, guided by the new political regime imposed by the Liberal Revolution, tried to re-establish Brazil as a colony.<ref>Lustosa, pp.&nbsp;117–19</ref> The Brazilians refused to yield, and Prince Pedro decided to stand with them, declaring the country's independence from Portugal on 7 September 1822.<ref>Lustosa, pp.&nbsp;150–153</ref> A month later, Prince Pedro was declared the first Emperor of Brazil, with the royal title of Dom Pedro&nbsp;I, resulting in the founding of the Empire of Brazil.<ref>Vianna, p.&nbsp;418</ref>

The Brazilian War of Independence, which had already begun along this process, spread through the northern, northeastern regions and in Cisplatina province.<ref>Diégues 2004, pp.&nbsp;168, 164, 178</ref> The last Portuguese soldiers surrendered on 8 March 1824;<ref>Diégues 2004, pp.&nbsp;179–80</ref> Portugal officially recognized Brazilian independence on 29 August 1825.<ref>Lustosa, p.&nbsp;208</ref>

On 7 April 1831, worn down by years of administrative turmoil and political dissent with both liberal and conservative sides of politics, including an attempt of republican secession and unreconciled to the way that absolutists in Portugal had given in the succession of King John VI, Pedro&nbsp;I went to Portugal to reclaim his daughter's crown after abdicating the Brazilian throne in favor of his five-year-old son and heir (who thus became the Empire's second monarch, with the royal title of Dom Pedro&nbsp;II).<ref>Lyra (v. 1), p.&nbsp;17</ref>


As the new Emperor could not exert his constitutional powers until he came of age, a regency was set up by the National Assembly.<ref>Carvalho 2007, p.&nbsp;21</ref> In the absence of a charismatic figure who could represent a moderate face of power, during this period a series of localized rebellions took place, such as the Cabanagem in Grão-Pará Province, the Malê Revolt in Salvador da Bahia, the Balaiada (Maranhão), the Sabinada (Bahia), and the Ragamuffin War, which began in Rio Grande do Sul and was supported by Giuseppe Garibaldi. These emerged from the dissatisfaction of the provinces with the central power, coupled with old and latent social tensions peculiar to a vast, slaveholding and newly independent nation state.

During the last phase of the monarchy, internal political debate centered on the issue of slavery. The Atlantic slave trade was abandoned in 1850,<ref>Bethell, Leslie "The Abolition of the Brazilian Slave Trade: Britain, Brazil and the Slave Trade" Cambridge University Press 1970, "Cambridge Latin American Studides", Chapters 9 to 12. [https://books.google.com/books?id=2LsNTUPI_6sC View on Google Books]</ref> as a result of the British Aberdeen Act, but only in May 1888, after a long process of internal mobilization and debate for an ethical and legal dismantling of slavery in the country, was the institution formally abolished with the approval of the Golden Law.<ref>Scott, Rebecca and others, The Abolition of Slavery and the Aftermath of Emancipation in Brazil, Duke University Press 1988  Seymour Drescher, Chap. 2: "Brazilian Abolition in Comparative Perspective"</ref>

The foreign-affairs policies of the monarchy dealt with issues with the countries of the Southern Cone with whom Brazil had borders. Long after the Cisplatine War that resulted in the independence of Uruguay,<ref>Levine, Robert M. "The history of Brazil" Greenwood Publishing Group, Inc. 1999, p. 62, [https://books.google.com/books?id=8RpIxe2utj8C&pg=PA62 View on Google Books]</ref> Brazil won three international wars during the 58-year reign of Pedro&nbsp;II. These were the Platine War, the Uruguayan War and the devastating Paraguayan War, the largest war effort in Brazilian history.<ref>Lyra (v.1), pp.&nbsp;164, 225, 272</ref>

Although there was no desire among the majority of Brazilians to change the country's form of government,</ref>

 Early republic 



The early republican government was nothing more than a military dictatorship, with the army dominating affairs both in Rio de Janeiro and in the states. Freedom of the press disappeared and elections were controlled by those in power.</ref><ref>Needell, Jeffrey D. "A Tropical Belle Epoque: Elite Culture and Society in Turn-of-the-Century Rio de Janeiro" Cambridge University Press 2010, pp. 10, 12</ref>

If in relation to its foreign policy, the country in this first republican period maintained a relative balance characterized by a success in resolving border disputes with neighboring countries,<ref>David R. Mares; "Violent peace: militarized interstate bargaining in Latin America" Columbia University Press 2001 Chapter 5 p. 125</ref> only broken by the Acre War (1899–1902) and its involvement in World War I (1914–1918),<ref>Bradford Burns 1993, p. 305</ref><ref>M.Sharp, I. Westwell & J.Westwood; "History of World War I, Volume 1" Marshall Cavendish Corporation 2002, p. 97</ref><ref></ref>

Little by little, Rebellions and revolutions in Brazil#1st Republican period (1889–a cycle of general instability sparked by these crises undermined the regime to such an extent that in the wake of the murder of his running mate, the defeated opposition presidential candidate Getúlio Vargas, supported by most of the military, successfully led the Revolution of 1930.<ref>Levine; Robert M. & Crocitti; John J. The Brazil Reader: History, Culture, Politics, Duke University Press 1999, IV – The Vargas Era</ref><ref>Keen, Benjamin / Haynes, Kate A History of Latin America; Volume 2, Waldsworth Cengage Learning 2004, pp.&nbsp;356–57</ref> Vargas and the military were supposed to assume power temporarily, but instead closed down Congress, extinguished the Constitution, ruled with emergency powers and replaced the states' governors with his own supporters.<ref>McCann; Frank D. Soldiers of the Patria: A History of the Brazilian Army, 1889–1937, Stanford University Press 2004, p. 303 </ref><ref>Ibidem Williams 2001</ref>

In the 1930s, three failed attempts to remove Vargas and his supporters from power occurred. The first was the Constitutionalist Revolution in 1932, led by the Paulista oligarchy. The second was a Communist uprising in November 1935, and the last one a putsch attempt by local fascists in May 1938.<ref>E. Bradford Burns; A History of Brazil Columbia University Press 1993 p. 352 </ref><ref>Frank M. Colby, Allen L. Churchill, Herbert T. Wade & Frank H. Vizetelly; The New international year book Dodd, Mead & Co. 1989, p. 102 "The Fascist Revolt"</ref> The 1935 uprising created a security crisis in which Congress transferred more power to the executive branch. The 1937 Brazilian coup d'1937 coup d'état resulted in the cancellation of the 1938 election and formalized Vargas as dictator, beginning the Estado Novo era. During this period, government brutality and censorship of the press increased.<ref>Bourne, Richard Getulio Vargas of Brazil, 1883–1954 C. Knight 1974, p. 77</ref>

Throughout World War II, Brazil remained neutral until August 1942 Brazil suffered retaliation by Nazi Germany and Fascist Italy in a strategic dispute over the South Atlantic, and, therefore, entered on the allied side.<ref>Scheina, Robert L. Latin America's Wars Vol.II: The Age of the Professional Soldier, 1900–2001. Potomac Books, 2003 </ref>

With the Allied victory in 1945 and the end of the fascist regimes in Europe, Vargas's position became unsustainable and he was swiftly overthrown in another military coup, with democracy "reinstated" by the same army that had ended it 15 years earlier.<ref>McCann 2004, p. 441</ref> Vargas committed suicide in August 1954 amid a political crisis, after having returned to power by election in 1950.<ref>Roett; Riordan Brazil: Politics in a Patrimonial Society, GreenWood Publishing Group 1999, pp. 106–08 </ref><ref>Keen & Haynes 2004, pp.&nbsp;361–62</ref>

 Contemporary era 


Several brief interim governments followed Vargas's suicide.<ref>Skidmore, p.&nbsp;201</ref> Juscelino Kubitschek became president in 1956 and assumed a conciliatory posture towards the political opposition that allowed him to govern without major crises.<ref>Skidmore, pp.&nbsp;202–203</ref> The economy and industrial sector grew remarkably,<ref>Skidmore, p.&nbsp;204</ref> but his greatest achievement was the construction of the new capital city of Brasília, inaugurated in 1960.<ref>Skidmore, pp.&nbsp;204–205</ref> Kubitschek's successor, Jânio Quadros, resigned in 1961 less than a year after taking office.<ref>Skidmore, pp.&nbsp;209–210</ref> His vice-president, João Goulart, assumed the presidency, but aroused strong political opposition<ref>Skidmore, p.&nbsp;210</ref> and was 1964 Brazilian coup d'deposed in April 1964 by a coup that resulted in a military dictatorship.<ref>Fausto (2005), p.&nbsp;397</ref>

The new regime was intended to be transitory<ref>Gaspari, A Ditadura Envergonhada, pp. 141–42.</ref> but gradually closed in on itself and became a full dictatorship with the promulgation of the AI-Fifth Institutional Act in 1968.<ref name="Gaspari p.35">Gaspari, A Ditadura Envergonhada, p.&nbsp;35.</ref> Oppression was not limited to those who resorted to guerrilla tactics to fight the regime, but also reached institutional opponents, artists, journalists and other members of civil society,

Civilians returned to power in 1985 when José Sarney assumed the presidency. He became unpopular during his tenure through failure to control the economic crisis and hyperinflation he inherited from the military regime.<ref>Fausto (2005), pp.&nbsp;464–65.</ref> Sarney's unsuccessful government led to the Brazilian presidential election,election in 1989 of the almost-unknown Fernando Collor, subsequently impeached by the National Congress in 1992.<ref>Fausto (2005), pp.&nbsp;465, 475.</ref> Collor was succeeded by his vice-president, Itamar Franco, who appointed Fernando Henrique Cardoso Minister of Finance. In 1994, Cardoso produced a highly successful Plano Real,<ref>Skidmore, p.&nbsp;311.</ref> that, after decades of failed economic plans made by previous governments attempting to curb hyperinflation, finally stabilized the Brazilian economy.<ref>Fausto (2005), p.&nbsp;482.</ref> Cardoso won the Brazilian presidential election,1994 election, and Brazilian presidential election,again in 1998.<ref>Fausto (2005), p.&nbsp;474.</ref>

The peaceful transition of power from Cardoso to his main opposition leader, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva (Brazilian presidential election,elected in 2002 and Brazilian presidential election,re-elected in 2006), was seen as proof that Brazil had achieved a long-sought political stability.<ref>Fausto (2005), p.&nbsp;502.</ref><ref>Zirin, 2014. Chapter 3</ref> However, sparked by indignation and frustrations accumulated over decades from corruption, police brutality, inefficiencies of the political establishment and public service, numerous peaceful protests erupted in Brazil from the middle of first term of Dilma Rousseff, who had succeeded Lula after winning election Brazilian presidential election,in 2010 and again Brazilian presidential election,in 2014 by narrow margins.<ref>[https://www.theguardian.com/world/2013/jun/22/urban-protest-changing-global-social-network "Global protest grows as citizens lose faith in politics and the State"] article on "the Guardian"</ref><ref>Zirin, 2014. Chapter 7 & Conclusion.</ref>

Image:Ulyssesguimaraesconstituicao.Ulysses Guimarães holding the Constitution of 1988 in his hands.

Rousseff was impeached by the Brazilian Congress in 2016, halfway into her second term,<ref name="auto1"></ref>

In the fiercely disputed 2018 elections, the controversial conservative candidate Jair Bolsonaro of the Social Liberal Party (PSL) was elected president, winning in the second round Fernando Haddad, of the Workers'Workers Party (PT), with the support of 55.13% of the valid votes.<ref></ref>

 Geography 



Brazil occupies a large area along the eastern coast of South America and includes much of the continent's interior,<ref name="Encarta 6"></ref> sharing land borders with Uruguay to the south; Argentina and Paraguay to the southwest; Bolivia and Peru to the west; Colombia to the northwest; and Venezuela, Guyana, Suriname and France (French overseas region of French Guiana) to the north. It shares a border with every South American country except Ecuador and Chile.<ref name="CIA Geo" />

It also encompasses a number of oceanic archipelagos, such as Fernando de Noronha, Rocas Atoll, Saint Peter and Paul Rocks, and Trindade and Martim Vaz.<ref name="CIA Geo" /> Its size, relief, climate, and natural resources make Brazil geographically diverse.<ref name="Encarta 6" /> Including its Atlantic islands, Brazil lies between latitudes 6°N and 34°S, and longitudes 28° and 74°W.<ref name="CIA Geo" />

Brazil is the fifth largest country in the world, and third largest in the Americas, with a total area of  of water. Brazil is also the longest country in the world, spanning 4,395&nbsp;km (2,731&nbsp;mi) from north to south,<ref name="CIA Geo" /> and the only country in the world that has the equator and the Tropic of Capricorn running through it.<ref name="CIA Geo" />

It spans four time zones; from UTC-UTC−5 comprising the state of Acre and the westernmost portion of Amazonas, to UTC−UTC−4 in the western states, to UTC−UTC−3 in the eastern states (the national time) and UTC−UTC−2 in the Atlantic islands.<ref name="timezones"></ref>

 Topography and hydrography 



Brazilian topography is also diverse and includes hills, mountains, plains, highlands, and scrublands. Much of the terrain lies between </ref> The main upland area occupies most of the southern half of the country.<ref name="Encarta 7" /> The northwestern parts of the plateau consist of broad, rolling terrain broken by low, rounded hills.<ref name="Encarta 7" />

The southeastern section is more rugged, with a complex mass of ridges and mountain ranges reaching elevations of up to , and the lowest is the Atlantic Ocean.<ref name="CIA Geo" />

Brazil has a dense and complex system of rivers, one of the world's most extensive, with eight major drainage basins, all of which drain into the Atlantic.<ref name="Encarta 8"></ref> Major rivers include the Amazon (the world's second-longest river and the largest in terms of volume of water), the Paraná and its major tributary the Iguaçu (which includes the Iguazu Falls), the Negro, São Francisco, Xingu, Madeira and Tapajós rivers.<ref name="Encarta 8" />

 Climate 



The climate of Brazil comprises a wide range of weather conditions across a large area and varied topography, but most of the country is tropical.<ref name="CIA Geo" /> According to the Köppen system, Brazil hosts six major climatic subtypes: desert, equatorial, tropical, Semi-semiarid, oceanic and subtropical. The different climatic conditions produce environments ranging from equatorial rainforests in the north and semiarid deserts in the northeast, to temperate coniferous forests in the south and tropical and subtropical grasslands, savannas,tropical savannas in central Brazil.<ref name="BBC Weather"></ref>

An equatorial climate characterizes much of northern Brazil. There is no real dry season, but there are some variations in the period of the year when most rain falls.<ref name="BBC Weather" /> Temperatures average ,<ref name="BT" /> with more significant temperature variation between night and day than between seasons.<ref name="Encarta 9" />

Over central Brazil rainfall is more seasonal, characteristic of a savanna climate.<ref name="Encarta 9" /> This region is as extensive as the Amazon basin but has a very different climate as it lies farther south at a higher altitude.<ref name="BBC Weather" /> In the interior northeast, seasonal rainfall is even more extreme.<ref name="Rain" />

The semiarid climatic region generally receives less than . Princeton University Press.</ref> A similarly devastating drought occurred in 1915.<ref>[http://www.fao.org/DOCREP/005/W8514E/W8514E29.htm "Inland fishery enhancements"]. FAO.</ref>

South of Bahia, near the coasts, and more southerly most of the state of São Paulo, the distribution of rainfall changes, with rain falling throughout the year.<ref name="BBC Weather" /> The south enjoys subtropical conditions, with cool winters and average annual temperatures not exceeding ;<ref name="BT" /> winter frosts and snowfall are not rare in the highest areas.<ref name="BBC Weather" /><ref name="Encarta 9" />

In 2020 the government of Brazil pledged to reduce its annual greenhouse gases emissions by 43% by 2030. It also set as indicative target of reaching carbon neutrality by 2060 if the country gets 10 billion dollars per year.<ref></ref>

 Biodiversity and conservation 


The wildlife of Brazil comprises all naturally occurring animals, plants, and fungi in the South American country. Home to 60% of the Amazon Rainforest, which accounts for approximately one-tenth of all                                                      
species in the world,<ref></ref> Brazil is considered to have the greatest biodiversity of any country on the planet, containing over 70% of all animal and plant species catalogued.<ref></ref> It has the most known species of plants (55,000), freshwater fish (3,000), and mammals (over 689).<ref name="DannyP_2007_shoestring"></ref> It also ranks third on the list of countries with the most bird species (1,832) and second with the most reptile species (744).<ref name="DannyP_2007_shoestring"/> The number of fungal species is unknown but is large.<ref name="Silva, M 1995">Da Silva, M. and D.W. Minter. 1995. Fungi from Brazil recorded by Batista and Co-workers. Mycological Papers 169. CABI, Wallingford, UK. 585 pp.</ref> Brazil is second only to Indonesia as the country with the most endemic species.<ref></ref>

Brazil's large territory comprises different ecosystems, such as the Amazon rainforest, recognized as having the greatest biological diversity in the world,<ref name="WWF"></ref>


More than one-fifth of the Amazon Rainforest in Brazil has been completely destroyed, and more than 70 mammals are endangered.<ref name="DannyP_2007_shoestring"/> The threat of extinction comes from several sources, including deforestation and poaching. Extinction is even more problematic in the Atlantic Forest, where nearly 93% of the forest has been cleared.<ref></ref>

By 2013, however, Brazil's "dramatic policy-driven reduction in Amazon Basin deforestation" was a "global exception in terms of forest change", according to scientific journal Science.<ref name="sciencemag_Hansen_20131115"></ref>

 Government and politics 



The form of government is a democratic federative republic, with a presidential system.<ref name="Constituição" /> The president is both head of state and head of government of the Union and is elected for a four-year term,<ref name="Constituição" /> with the possibility of re-election for a second successive term. The current president is Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva.<ref name="auto"></ref> The President appoints the Ministers of State, who assist in government.<ref name="Constituição" />

Legislative houses in each political entity are the main source of law in Brazil. The National Congress is the Federation's bicameral legislature, consisting of the Chamber of Deputies and the Federal Senate. Judiciary authorities exercise jurisdictional duties almost exclusively. In 2021, the Economist Intelligence Unit's Democracy Index categorized Brazil as a "flawed democracy", ranking 46th in the report,<ref></ref>

The political-administrative organization of the Federative Republic of Brazil comprises the Union, the states, the Federal District, and the municipalities.<ref name="Constituição" /> The Union, the states, the Federal District, and the municipalities, are the "spheres of government". The federation is set on five fundamental principles: sovereignty, citizenship, dignity of human beings, the social values of labor and freedom of enterprise, and political pluralism.<ref name="Constituição" />


The classic tripartite branches of government (executive, legislative and judicial under a checks and balances system) are formally established by the Constitution.<ref name="Constituição" /> The executive and legislative are organized independently in all three spheres of government, while the judiciary is organized only at the federal and state and Federal District spheres. All members of the executive and legislative branches are directly elected.<ref name=embassy></ref>

For most of its democratic history, Brazil has had a multi-party system, with proportional representation. Voting is compulsory for the literate between 18 and 70 years old and optional for illiterates and those between 16 and 18 or beyond 70.<ref name="Constituição" /> The country has more than 40 active political parties. Fifteen political parties are represented in Congress. It is common for politicians to switch parties, and thus the proportion of congressional seats held by particular parties changes regularly.<ref></ref>

 Law 




Brazilian law is based on the civil law legal system<ref>[http://www.oas.org/juridico/mla/en/bra/en_bra-int-des-ordrjur.html "The Brazilian Legal System"], Organization of American States. Retrieved 17 May 2007.</ref> and civil law concepts prevail over common law practice. Most of Brazilian law is codified, although non-codified statutes also represent a substantial part, playing a complementary role. Court decisions set out interpretive guidelines; however, they are seldom binding on other specific cases. Doctrinal works and the works of academic jurists have strong influence in law creation and in law cases. Judges and other judicial officials are appointed after passing entry exams.<ref name=embassy />

The legal system is based on the Federal Constitution, promulgated on 5 October 1988, and the fundamental law of Brazil. All other legislation and court decisions must conform to its rules.<ref>José Afonso da Silva, Curso de Direito Constitucional Positivo (Malheiros, 2004; </ref> Legislative entities are the main source of statutes, although in certain matters judiciary and executive bodies may enact legal norms.<ref name="Constituição" /> Jurisdiction is administered by the judiciary entities, although in rare situations the Federal Constitution allows the Federal Senate to pass on legal judgments.<ref name="Constituição" /> There are also specialized military, labor, and electoral courts.<ref name="Constituição" /> The highest court is the Supreme Federal Court.

This system has been criticized over the last few decades for the slow pace of decision-making. Lawsuits on appeal may take several years to resolve, and in some cases more than a decade elapses before definitive rulings.<ref>Miguel Glugoski and Odete Medauar, [http://www.usp.br/jorusp/arquivo/2003/jusp667/pag0304.htm "Nossos direitos nas suas mãos"], USP Journal, 24–30 November 2003. Retrieved 17 May 2007.</ref> Nevertheless, the Supreme Federal Tribunal was the first court in the world to transmit its sessions on television, and also via YouTube.<ref>Diego Abreu, [http://g1.globo.com/Noticias/Brasil/0,,MUL1326475-5598,00.html "Primeira Corte do mundo a ter canal de vídeo no YouTube é o STF"], [http://g1.globo.com/ G1].  Consulted on 5 December 2009.</ref>

 Military 


The armed forces of Brazil are the largest in Latin America by active personnel and the largest in terms of military equipment.<ref>[http://revistaepoca.globo.com/Revista/Epoca/0,,EMI14439-15273-2,00-UMA+NOVA+AGENDA+MILITAR.html Uma Nova Agenda Militar] </ref>

Numbering close to 236,000 active personnel,<ref></ref> The states' Military Police and the Military Firefighters Corps are described as an ancillary forces of the Army by the constitution, but are under the control of each state's governor.<ref name="Constituição" />

Brazil's navy once operated some of the most powerful warships in the world with the two </ref>

The Air Force is the largest in Latin America and has about 700 crewed aircraft in service and effective about 67,000 personnel.<ref></ref>

Brazil has not been invaded since 1865 during the Paraguayan War.<ref></ref>

 Foreign policy 



Brazil's international relations are based on Article 4 of the Federal Constitution, which establishes Non-non-intervention, self-determination, international cooperation and the peaceful settlement of conflicts as the guiding principles of Brazil's relationship with other countries and multilateral organizations.<ref>[http://www.v-brazil.com/government/laws/titleI.html Article 4 of the Federal Constitution of Brazil]  V-Brazil. Retrieved on 20 September 2011.</ref>

Brazil's foreign policy is a by-product of the country's position as a regional power in Latin America, a leader among developing countries, and an emerging world power.<ref>[https://web.archive.org/web/20090710013700/http://www.wilsoncenter.org/news/docs/RL33456.pdf U.S. Congressional Report on Brazil] United States Congress. Retrieved on 23 June 2009.</ref> Brazilian foreign policy has generally been based on the principles of multilateralism, peaceful dispute settlement, and non-non-intervention in the affairs of other countries.<ref>Georges D. Landau, "The Decision-making Process in Foreign Policy: The Case of Brazil", Center for Strategic and International Studies: Washington DC: March 2003</ref> Brazil is a founding member state of the Community of Portuguese Language Countries (CPLP), also known as the Lusophone Commonwealth, an international organization and political association of Lusophone nations across four continents, where Portuguese is an official language.

An increasingly well-developed tool of Brazil's foreign policy is providing aid as a donor to other developing countries.<ref name="ODI1">Cabral and Weinstock 2010. [http://www.odi.org.uk/resources/details.asp?id=5120&title=brazil-election-emerging-donor-aid Brazil: an emerging aid player] (). London: Overseas Development Institute</ref>

 Law enforcement and crime 



In Brazil, the Constitution establishes six different police agencies for law enforcement: Federal Police Department, Federal Highway Police, Federal Railroad Police, Federal, District and State Penal Police (included by the Constitutional Amendment No. 104, of 2019), Military Police and Civil Police. Of these, the first three are affiliated with federal authorities, the last two are subordinate to state governments and the Penal Police can be subordinated to the federal or state/district government. All police forces are the responsibility of the executive branch of any of the federal or state powers.<ref name="Constituição" /> The National Public Security Force also can act in public disorder situations arising anywhere in the country.<ref></ref>

The country still has above-average levels of violent crime and particularly high levels of gun violence and homicide. In 2012, the World Health Organization (WHO) estimated the number of 32 deaths per 100,000 inhabitants, one of the highest rates of homicide of the world.<ref></ref>

Brazil also has high levels of incarceration and the third largest prison population in the world (behind only China and the United States), with an estimated total of approximately 700,000 prisoners around the country (June 2014), an increase of about 300% compared to the index registered in 1992.<ref></ref>

 Administrative divisions 
{| class="infobox"
|style="text-align: center;"|States of Brazil and Regions of Brazil
|}


Brazil is a federation composed of 26 states, one federal district, and the 5,570 municipalities.<ref name="Constituição" /> States have autonomous administrations, collect their own taxes and receive a share of taxes collected by the Federal government. They have a governor and a unicameral legislative body elected directly by their voters. They also have independent Courts of Law for common justice. Despite this, states have much less autonomy to create their own laws than in the United States. For example, criminal and civil laws can be voted by only the federal bicameral Congress and are uniform throughout the country.<ref name="Constituição" />

The states and the federal district may be grouped into regions: Northern Region,Northern, Northeast Region,Northeast, Central-West Region,Central-West, Southeast Region,Southeast and Southern Region,Southern. The Brazilian regions are merely geographical, not political or administrative divisions, and they do not have any specific form of government. Although defined by law, Brazilian regions are useful mainly for statistical purposes, and also to define the distribution of federal funds in development projects.

Municipalities, as the states, have autonomous administrations, collect their own taxes and receive a share of taxes collected by the Union and state government.<ref name="Constituição" /> Each has a mayor and an elected legislative body, but no separate Court of Law. Indeed, a Court of Law organized by the state can encompass many municipalities in a single justice administrative division called comarca (county).

 Economy 




Brazil's List of countries by GNI (nominal) per capita#Upper-upper-middle income mixed market economy is rich in natural resources.<ref></ref> The Brazilian real is the national currency.

Brazil's diversified economy includes agriculture, industry, and a wide range of services.<ref name="BansalPhatak2009"></ref>

Brazil is one of the largest producers of various agricultural commodities,<ref></ref>

Brazil is the world's 24th-largest exporter and 26th-largest importer </ref>

The tertiary sector (trade and services) represented 75.8% of the country's GDP in 2018, according to the IBGE. The service sector was responsible for 60% of GDP and trade for 13%. It covers a wide range of activities: commerce, accommodation and catering, transport, communications, financial services, real estate activities and services provided to businesses, public administration (urban cleaning, sanitation, etc.) and other services such as education, social and health services, research and development, sports activities, etc., since it consists of activities complementary to other sectors.<ref></ref>

 Tourism 



Tourism in Brazil is a growing sector and key to the economy of several regions of the country. The country had 6.36&nbsp;million visitors in 2015, ranking in terms of the international tourist arrivals as the main destination in South America and second in Latin America after Mexico.<ref></ref>

Natural areas are its most popular tourism product, a combination of ecotourism with leisure and recreation, mainly sun and beach, and adventure travel, as well as cultural tourism. Among the most popular destinations are the Amazon Rainforest, beaches and dunes in the Northeast Region,Northeast Region, the Pantanal in the Center-West Region,Center-West Region, beaches at Rio de Janeiro and Santa Catarina, cultural tourism in Minas Gerais and business trips to São Paulo.<ref name="Palhares2012"></ref>

In terms of the 2015 Travel and Tourism Competitiveness Index (TTCI), which is a measurement of the factors that make it attractive to develop business in the travel and tourism industry of individual countries, Brazil ranked in the 28st place at the world's level, third in the Americas, after Canada and United States.<ref> See Table 4, pp. 18–19 and Country/Economy Profile: Brazil, pp. 116–17.</ref>

Brazil's main competitive advantages are its natural resources, which ranked 1st on this criteria out of all countries considered, and ranked 23rd for its cultural resources, due to its many World Heritage Sites. The TTCI report notes Brazil's main weaknesses: its ground transport infrastructure remains underdeveloped (ranked 116th), with the quality of roads ranking in 105th place; and the country continues to suffer from a lack of price competitiveness (ranked 114th), due in part to high ticket taxes and airport charges, as well as high prices and high taxation. Safety and security have improved significantly: 75th in 2011, up from 128th in 2008.<ref name="TTCI2013" />

 Science and technology 



Technological research in Brazil is largely carried out in public universities and research institutes, with the majority of funding for basic research coming from various government agencies.<ref name="DevelopmentStaff2006v"></ref>

The Brazilian Space Agency has the most advanced space program in Latin America, with significant resources to launch vehicles, and manufacture of satellites. Owner of relative technological sophistication, the country develops submarines, aircraft, as well as being involved in space research, having a Vehicle Launch Center Light and being the only country in the Southern Hemisphere the integrate team building International Space Station (ISS).<ref name="NASA">[http://www.nasa.gov/centers/johnson/news/releases/1996_1998/h97-233.html NASA Signs International Space Station Agreement With Brazil] NASA.</ref>

The country is also a pioneer in the search for oil in deep water, from where it extracts 73% of its reserves.
Uranium is enriched at the Resende Nuclear Fuel Factory, mostly for research purposes (as Brazil obtains 88% of its electricity from hydroelectricity<ref></ref>

Brazil is one of the three countries in Latin America<ref></ref>

Among the most renowned Brazilian inventors are priests Bartolomeu de Gusmão, Landell de Moura and Francisco João de Azevedo, besides Alberto Santos-Dumont,<ref></ref>

Brazilian science is represented by the likes of César Lattes (Brazilian physicist Pathfinder of Pi Meson),<ref name="Lattes"></ref> Artur Ávila (the first Latin American winner of the Fields Medal)<ref>[http://www1.folha.uol.com.br/ciencia/2014/08/1499290-brasileiro-ganha-a-medalha-fields-considerada-o-nobel-da-matematica.shtml Brasileiro ganha a Medalha Fields, considerada o "Nobel da Matemática"].</ref> and Fritz Müller (pioneer in factual support of the theory of evolution by Charles Darwin).<ref name="West, David A 2003">West, David A. 2003. Fritz Müller: a naturalist in Brazil. Blacksburg: Pocahontas Press</ref>

 Energy 


Brazil is the world's tenth largest energy consumer with much of its energy coming from renewable sources, particularly hydroelectricity and ethanol; the Itaipu Dam is the world's largest hydroelectric plant by energy generation,<ref name="SchmidtOnyango2011"></ref>

At the end of 2021 Brazil was the 2nd country in the world in terms of installed hydroelectric power (109.4 GW) and biomass (15.8 GW), the 7th country in the world in terms of installed wind power (21.1 GW) and the 14th country in the world in terms of installed solar power (13.0 GW) – on track to also become one of the top 10 in the world in solar energy.<ref></ref> At the end of 2021, Brazil was the 4th largest producer of wind energy in the world (72 TWh), behind only China, USA and Germany, and the 11th largest producer of solar energy in the world (16.8 TWh).<ref>[https://ourworldindata.org/renewable-energy Hannah Ritchie, Max Roser: Solar Power Generation]</ref>

The main characteristic of the Brazilian energy matrix is that it is much more renewable than that of the world. While in 2019 the world matrix was only 14% made up of renewable energy, Brazil's was at 45%. Petroleum and oil products made up 34.3% of the matrix; sugar cane derivatives, 18%; hydraulic energy, 12.4%; natural gas, 12.2%; firewood and charcoal, 8.8%; varied renewable energies, 7%; mineral coal, 5.3%; nuclear, 1.4%, and other non-renewable energies, 0.6%.<ref name="Matriz Energética e Elétrica">[https://www.epe.gov.br/pt/abcdenergia/matriz-energetica-e-eletrica Matriz Energética e Elétrica]</ref>

In the electric energy matrix, the difference between Brazil and the world is even greater: while the world only had 25% of renewable electric energy in 2019, Brazil had 83%. The Brazilian electric matrix was composed of: hydraulic energy, 64.9%; biomass, 8.4%; wind energy, 8.6%; solar energy, 1%; natural gas, 9.3%; oil products, 2%; nuclear, 2.5%; coal and derivatives, 3.3%.<ref name="Matriz Energética e Elétrica"/>
Brazil has the largest electricity sector in Latin America.
Its capacity at the end of 2021 was 181,532 MW.<ref name="Ministério de Minas e Energia">https://antigo.aneel.gov.br/web/guest/sala-de-imprensa-exibicao-2/-/asset_publisher/zXQREz8EVlZ6/content/brasil-termina-2021-com-maior-acrescimo-em-potencia-instalada-desde-2016/656877?inheritRedirect=false&redirect=https%3A%2F%2Fantigo.aneel.gov.br%2Fweb%2Fguest%2Fsala-de-imprensa-exibicao-2%3Fp_p_id%3D101_INSTANCE_zXQREz8EVlZ6%26p_p_lifecycle%3D0%26p_p_state%3Dnormal%26p_p_mode%3Dview%26p_p_col_id%3Dcolumn-2%26p_p_col_pos%3D2%26p_p_col_count%3D3%26_101_INSTANCE_zXQREz8EVlZ6_advancedSearch%3Dfalse%26_101_INSTANCE_zXQREz8EVlZ6_keywords%3D%26_101_INSTANCE_zXQREz8EVlZ6_delta%3D15%26p_r_p_564233524_resetCur%3Dfalse%26_101_INSTANCE_zXQREz8EVlZ6_cur%3D5%26_101_INSTANCE_zXQREz8EVlZ6_andOperator%3Dtrue National Agency of Energy</ref>

As for oil, the Brazilian government has embarked on a program over the decades to reduce dependence on imported oil, which previously accounted for more than 70% of the country's oil needs. Brazil became self-sufficient in oil in 2006–2007. In 2021, the country closed the year as the 7th oil producer in the world, with an average of close to 3 million barrels per day, becoming an exporter of the product.<ref>[https://www.cnnbrasil.com.br/business/brasil-anuncia-aumento-da-producao-de-petroleo-em-10-para-ajudar-a-estabilizar-precos/ Brasil anuncia aumento da produção de petróleo em 10% para ajudar a estabilizar preços]</ref><ref></ref>

 Transportation 




According to the National Research by Household Sample (PNAD) of 2008, 48.43% of the population (about 92 million) described themselves as White; 43.80% (about 83 million) as Pardo (brown), 6.84% (about 13 million) as Black; 0.58% (about 1.1&nbsp;million) as East Asian (officially called yellow or amarela); and 0.28% (about 536 thousand) as Amerindian (officially called indígena, Indigenous), while 0.07% (about 130 thousand) did not declare their race.<ref name="PNADIBGE">2008 PNAD, IBGE. [https://web.archive.org/web/20110614225239/http://www.sidra.ibge.gov.br/bda/tabela/protabl.asp?c=262&i=P&nome=on&notarodape=on&tab=262&unit=0&pov=3&opc1=1&poc2=1&OpcTipoNivt=1&opn1=2&nivt=0&orc86=3&poc1=1&orp=6&qtu3=27&opv=1&poc86=2&sec1=0&opc2=1&pop=1&opn2=0&orv=2&orc2=5&qtu2=5&sev=93&sev=1000093&opc86=1&sec2=0&opp=1&opn3=0&sec86=0&sec86=2776&sec86=2777&sec86=2779&sec86=2778&sec86=2780&sec86=2781&ascendente=on&sep=43344&orn=1&qtu7=9&orc1=4&qtu1=1&cabec=on&pon=1&OpcCara=44&proc=1&opn7=0&decm=99 "População residente por cor ou raça, situação e sexo"].</ref>

Since the arrival of the Portuguese in 1500, considerable genetic mixing between Amerindians, Europeans, and Africans has taken place in all regions of the country (with European ancestry being dominant nationwide according to the vast majority of all autosomal studies undertaken covering the entire population, accounting for between 65% to 77%).<ref name="alvaro.com.br"></ref>

Brazilian society is more markedly divided by social class lines, although a high income disparity is found between race groups, so racism and classism often overlap. Socially significant closeness to one racial group is taken in account more in the basis of appearance (phenotypes) rather than ancestry, to the extent that full siblings can pertain to different "racial" groups.<ref></ref><ref>Azevedo (1971), pp.&nbsp;2–3.</ref><ref name="Moreira 1981, p.&nbsp;108">Moreira (1981), p.&nbsp;108.</ref> Higher percents of Blacks, mulattoes and tri-racials can be found in the eastern coast of the Northeastern region from Bahia to Paraíba<ref name="Moreira 1981, p.&nbsp;108" /><ref>Azevedo (1971), pp.&nbsp;74–75.</ref> and also in northern Maranhão,<ref>Enciclopédia Barsa, vol. 10 (Rio de Janeiro: Encyclopædia Britannica do Brasil, 1987), p.&nbsp;355.</ref><ref>Azevedo (1971), p.&nbsp;74.</ref> southern Minas Gerais<ref name="Azevedo 1971, p.&nbsp;161">Azevedo (1971), p.&nbsp;161.</ref> and in eastern Rio de Janeiro.<ref name="Moreira 1981, p.&nbsp;108" /><ref name="Azevedo 1971, p.&nbsp;161" />

People of considerable Amerindian ancestry form the majority of the population in the Northern, Northeastern and Center-Western regions.<ref>Enciclopédia Barsa, vol. 4, pp.&nbsp;254–55, 258, 265.</ref> In 2007, the National Indian Foundation estimated that Brazil has 67 different uncontacted tribes, up from their estimate of 40 in 2005. Brazil is believed to have the largest number of uncontacted peoples in the world.<ref>[https://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/content/article/2007/07/07/AR2007070701312.html "In Amazonia, Defending the Hidden Tribes"], The Washington Post (8 July 2007).</ref>

 Religion 



Christianity is the country's predominant faith, with Roman Catholicism being its largest denomination. Brazil has the world's largest Catholic population.<ref name="PEWCATHOLIC"></ref> According to the 2010 Demographic Census (the PNAD survey does not inquire about religion), 64.63% of the population followed Roman Catholicism; 22.2% Protestantism; 2.0% Kardecist spiritism; 3.2% other religions, undeclared or undetermined; while 8.0% had no religion.<ref name="census2010">[ftp://ftp.ibge.gov.br/Censos/Censo_Demografico_2010/Caracteristicas_Gerais_Religiao_Deficiencia/tab1_4.pdf IBGE – Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estatística (Brazilian Institute for Geography and Statistics). 2010 Census]. Retrieved 7 August 2012.</ref>

Religion in Brazil was formed from the meeting of the Catholic Church with the religious traditions of enslaved African peoples and indigenous peoples.<ref name="BoyleSheen2013"></ref>

Religious pluralism increased during the 20th century,<ref name="Morris2006a"></ref>

In recent decades, Protestantism, particularly in forms of Pentecostalism and Evangelicalism, has spread in Brazil, while the proportion of Catholics has dropped significantly.<ref name="georgetown2"></ref> Greater Rio de Janeiro, not including the city proper, is the most irreligious and least Roman Catholic Brazilian periphery, while Greater Porto Alegre and Greater Fortaleza are on the opposite sides of the lists, respectively.<ref name="FGV no G1" />

In October 2009, the Brazilian Senate approved and enacted by the President of Brazil in February 2010, an agreement with the Vatican, in which the Legal Statute of the Catholic Church in Brazil is recognized. The agreement confirmed norms that were normally complied with regarding religious education in public elementary schools (which also ensures the teaching of other beliefs), marriage and spiritual assistance in prisons and hospitals. The project was criticized by parliamentarians who understood the end of the secular state with the approval of the agreement.<ref></ref>

 Health 



The Brazilian public health system, the Unified Health System (Sistema Único de Saúde – SUS), is managed and provided by all levels of government,<ref name="ForgiaCouttolenc2008"></ref>

Public health services are universal and offered to all citizens of the country for free. However, the construction and maintenance of health centers and hospitals are financed by taxes, and the country spends about 9% of its GDP on expenditures in the area. In 2012, Brazil had 1.85 doctors and 2.3 hospital beds for every 1,000 inhabitants.<ref></ref>

Despite all the progress made since the creation of the universal health care system in 1988, there are still several public health problems in Brazil. In 2006, the main points to be solved were the high infant (2.51%) and maternal mortality rates (73.1 deaths per 1000 births).<ref name="Radar social" />

The number of deaths from noncommunicable diseases, such as cardiovascular diseases (151.7 deaths per 100,000 inhabitants) and cancer (72.7 deaths per 100,000 inhabitants), also has a considerable impact on the health of the Brazilian population. Finally, external but preventable factors such as car accidents, violence and suicide caused 14.9% of all deaths in the country.<ref name="Radar social"></ref>

 Education 



The Federal Constitution and the Law of Guidelines and Bases of National Education determine that the Union, the states, the Federal District, and the municipalities must manage and organize their respective education systems. Each of these public educational systems is responsible for its own maintenance, which manages funds as well as the mechanisms and funding sources. The constitution reserves 25% of the state budget and 18% of federal taxes and municipal taxes for education.<ref name="Usa2005"></ref>

According to the IBGE, in 2019, the literacy rate of the population was 93.4%, meaning that 11.3 million (6.6% of population) people are still illiterate in the country, with some states like Rio de Janeiro and Santa Catarina reaching around 97% of literacy rate;<ref name=":0"></ref><ref name=":0" />

Brazil's private institutions tend to be more exclusive and offer better quality education, so many high-income families send their children there. The result is a segregated educational system that reflects extreme income disparities and reinforces social inequality. However, efforts to change this are making impacts.<ref></ref>

The University of São Paulo is the second best university in Latin America, according to recent 2019 QS World University Rankings. Of the top 20 Latin American universities, eight are Brazilian. Most of them are public.
Attending an institution of higher education is required by Law of Guidelines and Bases of Education. Kindergarten, elementary and medium education are required of all students.<ref></ref>

 Language 




The official language of Brazil is Portuguese (Article 13 of the Constitution of the Federal Republic of Brazil), which almost all of the population speaks and is virtually the only language used in newspapers, radio, television, and for business and administrative purposes. Brazil is the only Portuguese-speaking nation in the Americas, making the language an important part of Brazilian national identity and giving it a national culture distinct from those of its Spanish-speaking neighbors.<ref name="language2"></ref>

Brazilian Portuguese has had its own development, mostly similar to 16th-century Central and Southern dialects of European Portuguese<ref></ref>

The sign language law legally recognized in 2002,<ref name="Libras 2002">[https://web.archive.org/web/20100910070529/http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/LEIS/2002/L10436.htm LEI Nº 10.436, DE 24 DE ABRIL DE 2002]. Presidência da República, Casa Civil, Subchefia para Assuntos Jurídicos. Retrieved on 19 May 2012.</ref> (the law was regulated in 2005)<ref name="Libras 2005">[http://www.planalto.gov.br/ccivil_03/_ato2004-2006/2005/decreto/d5626.htm Brazilian decree nº 5626, 22 December 2005]. Planalto.gov.br (23 December 2005). Retrieved on 19 May 2012.</ref> the use of the Brazilian Sign Language, more commonly known by its Portuguese acronym LIBRAS, in education and government services. The language must be taught as a part of the education and speech and language pathology curricula. LIBRAS teachers, instructors and translators are recognized professionals. Schools and health services must provide access ("inclusion") to deaf people.<ref name="Russo2011"></ref>

Minority languages are spoken throughout the nation. One hundred and eighty Amerindian languages are spoken in remote areas and a significant number of other languages are spoken by immigrants and their descendants.<ref name="Portuguese" /> In the municipality of São Gabriel da Cachoeira, Nheengatu (a currently endangered South American creole language – or an 'anti-creole', according to some linguists – with mostly Indigenous Brazilian languages lexicon and Portuguese-based grammar that, together with its southern relative língua geral paulista, once was a major lingua franca in Brazil,<ref></ref>

There are significant communities of German (mostly the Brazilian Hunsrückisch, a High German language dialect) and Italian (mostly the Talian, a Venetian dialect) origins in the Southern and Southeastern regions, whose ancestors' native languages were carried along to Brazil, and which, still alive there, are influenced by the Portuguese language.<ref></ref>

 Urbanization 


According to IBGE (Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics) urban areas already concentrate 84.35% of the population, while the Southeast region remains the most populated one, with over 80 million inhabitants.<ref></ref>
The largest urban agglomerations in Brazil are São Paulo, Rio de Janeiro, and Belo Horizonte – all in the Southeastern Region – with 21.1, 12.3, and 5.1&nbsp;million inhabitants respectively.<ref name="concentrações_urbanas" /></ref>


 Culture 


The core culture of Brazil is derived from Portuguese culture, because of its strong colonial ties with the Portuguese Empire.<ref name="Meade2009"></ref>

Some aspects of Brazilian culture were influenced by the contributions of Italian, German and other European as well as Japanese, Jewish and Arab immigrants who arrived in large numbers in the South and Southeast of Brazil during the 19th and 20th centuries.<ref name="Lesser2013a"></ref>

Brazilian art has developed since the 16th century into different styles that range from Baroque (the dominant style in Brazil until the early 19th century)<ref>Leandro Karnal, Teatro da fé: Formas de representação religiosa no Brasil e no México do século XVI, São Paulo, Editora Hucitec, 1998; available on [http://www.fflch.usp.br/dh/ceveh/public_html/biblioteca/livros/teatro_fe/index.htm fflch.usp.br] </ref>

 Architecture 
 


The architecture of Brazil is influenced by Europe, especially Portugal. It has a history that goes back 500 years to the time when Pedro Álvares Cabral landed in Brazil in 1500. Portuguese colonial architecture was the first wave of architecture to go to Brazil.<ref>Hue, Jorge de Souza (1999). Uma visão da arquitectura colonial no Brasil [A vision of Colonial Architecture in Brazil] (in Portuguese). Rio de Janeiro.</ref> It is the basis for all Brazilian architecture of later centuries.<ref>Boxer, Charles Ralph (1962). The Golden Age of Brazil, 1695–1750: Growing Pains of a Colonial Society. University of California Press.</ref> In the 19th century during the time of the Empire of Brazil, the country followed European trends and adopted Neoclassical and Gothic Revival architecture. Then in the 20th century especially in Brasilia, Brazil experimented with Modernist architecture.

The colonial architecture of Brazil dates to the early 16th century when Brazil was first explored, conquered and settled by the Portuguese. The Portuguese built architecture familiar to them in Europe in their aim to colonize Brazil. They built Portuguese colonial architecture which included churches, civic architecture including houses and forts in Brazilian cities and the countryside.<ref name="Guimaraens"/>

During 19th century, Brazilian architecture saw the introduction of more European styles to Brazil such as Neoclassical and Gothic Revival architecture. This was usually mixed with Brazilian influences from their own heritage which produced a unique form of Brazilian architecture.<ref name="Guimaraens">Guimaraens, Cêça de. [http://www.mre.gov.br/cdbrasil/itamaraty/web/port/artecult/arqurb/arquitet/index.htm Arquitetura] . Portal do Ministério das Relações Exteriores.</ref>

In the 1950s, the modernist architecture was introduced when Brasilia was built as new federal capital in the interior of Brazil to help develop the interior. The architect Oscar Niemeyer idealized and built government buildings, churches and civic buildings in the modernist style.<ref name="Claro">Claro, Mauro. [http://www.vitruvius.com.br/revistas/read/drops/09.025/1775 "Ambientes modernos. A casa modernista da Rua Santa Cruz, de Gregori Warchavchik, e outras casas da modernidade"]. In: Drops, 2008; 09 (025.03)</ref>

 Music 

Image:Tom Jobim e Chico Buarque no Festival Internacional da Canção (FIC).Tom Jobim, one of the creators of bossa nova, and Chico Buarque, one of the leading names of MPB.

The music of Brazil was formed mainly from the fusion of European, Native Indigenous, and African elements.<ref name="FonsecaWeiner1991"></ref> The major contribution of the African element was the rhythmic diversity and some dances and instruments that had a bigger role in the development of popular music and folk, flourishing especially in the twentieth century.<ref name="FonsecaWeiner1991" />

Popular music since the late eighteenth century began to show signs of forming a characteristically Brazilian sound, with samba considered the most typical and on the UNESCO cultural heritage list.<ref></ref>

Choro is a very popular music instrumental style. Its origins are in 19th-century Rio de Janeiro. In spite of the name, the style often has a fast and happy rhythm, characterized by virtuosity, improvisation, subtle modulations and full of syncopation and counterpoint.<ref name="MacGowanPessanha1998"></ref>

 Literature 



Brazilian literature dates back to the 16th century, to the writings of the first Portuguese explorers in Brazil, such as Pêro Vaz de Caminha, filled with descriptions of fauna, flora and commentary about the indigenous population that fascinated European readers.

Brazil produced significant works in Romanticism – novelists like Joaquim Manuel de Macedo and José de Alencar wrote novels about love and pain. Alencar, in his long career, also treated indigenous people as heroes in the Indigenist novels O Guaraní, Iracema and Ubirajara.<ref>[https://web.archive.org/web/20110725100730/http://www.brasembottawa.org/en/culture_academic/literature.html "Brazilian Literature: An Introduction"]. [http://ottawa.itamaraty.gov.br/pt-br/ Embassy of Brasil – Ottawa]. Visited on 2 November 2009.</ref> Machado de Assis, one of his contemporaries, wrote in virtually all genres and continues to gain international prestige from critics worldwide.<ref>Candido; Antonio. (1970) Vários escritos. São Paulo: Duas Cidades. p. 18</ref><ref>Caldwell, Helen (1970) Machado de Assis: The Brazilian Master and his Novels. Berkeley, Los Angeles and London, University of California Press.</ref><ref>Fernandez, Oscar Machado de Assis: The Brazilian Master and His Novels The Modern Language Journal, Vol. 55, No. 4 (Apr. 1971), pp. 255–56</ref>

Brazilian Modernism, evidenced by the Modern Art Week in 1922, was concerned with a nationalist avant-garde literature,<ref>Beatriz Mugayar Kühl, Arquitetura do ferro e arquitetura ferroviária em São Paulo: reflexões sobre a sua preservação, p. 202. Atelie Editorial, 1998.</ref> while Brazilian literature#Post-Post-Modernism brought a generation of distinct poets like João Cabral de Melo Neto, Carlos Drummond de Andrade, Vinicius de Moraes, Cora Coralina, Graciliano Ramos, Cecília Meireles, and internationally known writers dealing with universal and regional subjects like Jorge Amado, João Guimarães Rosa, Clarice Lispector and Manuel Bandeira.<ref>Daniel Balderston and Mike Gonzalez, Encyclopedia of Latin American and Caribbean Literature, 1900–2003, p. 288. Routledge, 2004.</ref><ref>Sayers, Portugal and Brazil in Transitn, "Literature". U of Minnesota Press, 1 January 1999.</ref><ref>Marshall C. Eakin and Paulo Roberto de Almeida, Envisioning Brazil: A Guide to Brazilian Studies in the United States: "Literature, Culture and Civilization". University of Wisconsin Press, 31 October 2005.</ref>

Brazil's most significant literary award is the Camões Prize, which it shares with the rest of the Portuguese-speaking world. As of 2016, Brazil has eleven recipients of the prize.<ref></ref>

 Cuisine 





Brazilian cuisine varies greatly by region, reflecting the country's varying mix of indigenous and immigrant populations. This has created a national cuisine marked by the preservation of regional differences.<ref name="Encarta 4"> braziltravelguide.com.</ref> and regional foods such as beiju, feijão tropeiro, vatapá, moqueca, polenta (from Italian cuisine) and acarajé (from African cuisine).<ref>Cascudo, Luis da Câmara. História da Alimentação no Brasil. São Paulo/Belo Horizonte: Editora USP/Itatiaia, 1983.</ref>

The national beverage is coffee and cachaça is Brazil's native liquor. Cachaça is distilled from sugar cane and is the main ingredient in the national cocktail, Caipirinha.<ref name="Bayor2011"></ref>

A typical meal consists mostly of rice and beans with beef, salad, french fries and a fried egg.<ref></ref> Popular snacks are pastel (a fried pastry); coxinha (a variation of chicken croquete); pão de queijo (cheese bread and cassava flour / tapioca); pamonha (corn and milk paste); esfirra (a variation of Lebanese pastry); kibbeh (from Arabic cuisine); empanada (pastry) and empada, little salt pies filled with shrimps or heart of palm.

Brazil has a variety of desserts such as brigadeiros (chocolate fudge balls), bolo de rolo (roll cake with goiabada), cocada (a coconut sweet), beijinhos (coconut truffles and clove) and romeu e julieta (cheese with goiabada). Peanuts are used to make paçoca, rapadura and pé-de-moleque. Local common fruits like açaí, cupuaçu, mango, papaya, cocoa, cashew, guava, orange, lime, passionfruit, pineapple, and hog plum are turned in juices and used to make chocolates, ice pops and ice cream.<ref>Freyre, Gilberto. Açúcar. Uma Sociologia do Doce, com Receitas de Bolos e Doces do Nordeste do Brasil. São Paulo, Companhia das Letras, 1997.</ref>

 Cinema 

Image:Palacio festivais.Festival de Gramado, the biggest film festival in the country
The Brazilian film industry began in the late 19th century, during the early days of the Belle Époque. While there were national film productions during the early 20th century, American films such as Rio the Magnificent were made in Rio de Janeiro to promote tourism in the city.<ref></ref> The 1941 unfinished film It'It's All True was divided in four segments, two of which were filmed in Brazil and directed by Orson Welles; it was originally produced as part of the United States' Good Neighbor Policy during Getúlio Vargas' Estado Novo government.

During the 1960s, the Cinema Novo movement rose to prominence with directors such as Glauber Rocha, Nelson Pereira dos Santos, Paulo Cesar Saraceni and Arnaldo Jabor. Rocha's films Deus e o Diabo na Terra do Sol (1964) and Terra em Transe (1967) are considered to be some of the greatest and most influential in Brazilian film history.<ref></ref>

During the 1990s, Brazil saw a surge of critical and commercial success with films such as O Quatrilho (Fábio Barreto, 1995), O Que É Isso, Companheiro? (Bruno Barreto, 1997) and Central do Brasil (Walter Salles, 1998), all of which were nominated for the Academy Award for Best Foreign Language Film, the latter receiving a Best Actress nomination for Fernanda Montenegro. The 2002 crime film City of God, directed by Fernando Meirelles, was critically acclaimed, scoring 90% on Rotten Tomatoes,<ref></ref> and receiving four Academy Award nominations in 2004, including Best Director. Notable film festivals in Brazil include the São Paulo and Rio de Janeiro International Film Festivals and the Gramado Festival.

 Media 




The Brazilian press was officially born in Rio de Janeiro on 13 May 1808 with the creation of the Royal Printing National Press by the Prince Regent Dom João.<ref name="EchevarríaPupo-Walker1996"></ref>

Radio broadcasting began on 7 September 1922, with a speech by then President Pessoa, and was formalized on 20 April 1923 with the creation of "Radio Society of Rio de Janeiro".<ref name="McCann2004"></ref>

Television in Brazil began officially on 18 September 1950, with the founding of TV Tupi by Assis Chateaubriand.<ref name="Ward2007"></ref> Commercial television channels broadcast internationally include Globo Internacional, RecordTV Internacional and Band Internacional.

 Theatre 


The theatre in Brazil has its origins in the period of Jesuit expansion when theater was used for the dissemination of Catholic doctrine in the 16th century. in the 17th and 18th centuries the first dramatists who appeared on the scene of European derivation was for court or private performances.<ref>[http://brasilescola.uol.com.br/biografia/padre-anchieta.htm Padre Anchieta] Brasil Escola.</ref> During the 19th century, dramatic theater gained importance and thickness, whose first representative was Luis Carlos Martins Pena (1813–1848), capable of describing contemporary reality. Always in this period the comedy of costume and comic production was imposed. Significant, also in the nineteenth century, was also the playwright Antônio Gonçalves Dias.<ref name=teatro></ref> There were also numerous operas and orchestras. The Brazilian conductor Antônio Carlos Gomes became internationally known with operas like Il Guarany. At the end of the 19th century orchestrated dramaturgias became very popular and were accompanied with songs of famous artists like the conductress Chiquinha Gonzaga.<ref>[http://www.arte.seed.pr.gov.br/modules/conteudo/conteudo.php?conteudo=196 O Teatro no Brasil] Secretaria da Educação do Paraná.</ref>

Already in the early 20th century there was the presence of theaters, entrepreneurs and actor companies, but paradoxically the quality of the products staggered, and only in 1940 the Brazilian theater received a boost of renewal thanks to the action of Paschoal Carlos Magno and his student's theater, the comedians group and the Italian actors Adolfo Celi, Ruggero Jacobbi and Aldo Calvo, founders of the Teatro Brasileiro de Comedia. From the 1960s it was attended by a theater dedicated to social and religious issues and to the flourishing of schools of dramatic art. The most prominent authors at this stage were Jorge Andrade and Ariano Suassuna.<ref name=teatro />

 Visual arts 

Image:Discovery of the Land1.Study for Discovery of the Land mural at the United States Library of Congress by Candido Portinari, one of the most important Brazilian painters

Brazilian painting emerged in the late 16th century,<ref>Louzada, Maria Alice & Louzada, Julio. [http://www.juliolouzada.com.br/primeirosmomentos.asp Os Primeiros Momentos da Arte Brasileira] . Júlio Louzada Artes Plásticas Brasil. Acesso 5 out 2010</ref> influenced by Baroque, Rococo, Neoclassicism, Romanticism, Realism, Modernism, Expressionism, Surrealism, Cubism and Abstracionism making it a major art style called Brazilian academic art.<ref>Leite, José Roberto Teixeira & Lemos, Carlos A.C. Os Primeiros Cem Anos, in Civita, Victor. Arte no Brasil. São Paulo: Abril Cultural, 1979</ref><ref name="Biscardi" /> 

The French Artistic Mission arrived in Brazil in 1816 proposing the creation of an art academy modeled after the respected Académie des Beaux-Arts, with graduation courses both for artists and craftsmen for activities such as modeling, decorating, carpentry and others and bringing artists like Jean-Baptiste Debret.<ref name="Biscardi"></ref>

Upon the creation of the Imperial Academy of Fine Arts, new artistic movements spread across the country during the 19th century and later the event called Modern Art Week definitely broke with academic tradition in 1922 and started a nationalist trend which was influenced by modernist arts.<ref name="Amaral"></ref> 

Among the best-known Brazilian painters are Ricardo do Pilar and Manuel da Costa Ataíde (baroque and rococo), Victor Meirelles, Pedro Américo and Almeida Júnior (romanticism and realism), Anita Malfatti, Ismael Nery, Lasar Segall, Emiliano di Cavalcanti, Vicente do Rego Monteiro, and Tarsila do Amaral (expressionism, surrealism and cubism), Aldo Bonadei, José Pancetti and Cândido Portinari (modernism).<ref>Sevcenko, Nicolau. Pindorama revisitada: cultura e sociedade em tempos de virada. Série Brasil cidadão. Editora Peirópolis, 2000. pp. 39–47</ref>

 Sports 



The most popular sport in Brazil is football.<ref></ref><ref>Zirin, 2014. Chapter 4 "Futebol: The Journey from Daring to Fear"</ref>
Image:Brasil conquista primeiro ouro olímpico nos penaltis 1039264-20082016- mg 4348.Players at the podium with the first Olympic Gold of the Brazil national football team, won in the Football at the 2016 Summer Olympics – Men'2016 Summer Olympics. Football is the most popular sport in the country.

Volleyball, basketball, auto racing, and martial arts also attract large audiences. The Brazil men's national volleyball team, for example, currently holds the titles of the World League, World Grand Champions Cup, FIVB Volleyball Men'World Championship and the FIVB Volleyball Men'World Cup. In auto racing, three Brazilian drivers have won the Formula One world championship eight times.<ref></ref> The country has also produced significant achievements in other sports such as sailing, swimming, tennis, surfing, skateboarding, MMA, gymnastics, boxing, judo, athletics and table tennis.

Some sport variations have their origins in Brazil: beach football,<ref></ref>

Brazil has hosted several high-profile international sporting events, like the 1950 FIFA World Cup<ref></ref>

 See also 

* Outline of Brazil

 Notes 



 References 


 Bibliography 

* Azevedo, Aroldo. O Brasil e suas regiões. São Paulo: Companhia Editora Nacional, 1971
* Barman, Roderick J. Citizen Emperor: Pedro II and the Making of Brazil, 1825–1891. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1999. 
* 
* C. R.Boxer, Charles R. The Portuguese Seaborne Empire (1969)
 * O império marítimo português 1415–1825. São Paulo: Companhia das Letras, 2002. 
* Bueno, Eduardo. Brasil: uma História. São Paulo: Ática, 2003. 
* Calmon, Pedro. História da Civilização Brasileira. Brasília: Senado Federal, 2002
* Carvalho, José Murilo de. D. Pedro II. São Paulo: Companhia das Letras, 2007
* Coelho, Marcos Amorim. Geografia do Brasil. 4th ed. São Paulo: Moderna, 1996
* Diégues, Fernando. A revolução brasílica. Rio de Janeiro: Objetiva, 2004
* Enciclopédia Barsa. Volume 4: Batráquio – Camarão, Filipe. Rio de Janeiro: Encyclopædia Britannica do Brasil, 1987
* 
* Fausto, Boris and Devoto, Fernando J. Brasil e Argentina: Um ensaio de história comparada (1850–2002), 2nd ed. São Paulo: Editoria 34, 2005. 
* Gaspari, Elio. A ditadura envergonhada. São Paulo: Companhia das Letras, 2002. 
* Janotti, Aldo. O Marquês de Paraná: inícios de uma carreira política num momento crítico da história da nacionalidade. Belo Horizonte: Itatiaia, 1990
* Lyra, Heitor. História de Dom Pedro II (1825–1891): Ascenção (1825–1870). v. 1. Belo Horizonte: Itatiaia, 1977
* Lyra, Heitor. História de Dom Pedro II (1825–1891): Declínio (1880–1891). v. 3. Belo Horizonte: Itatiaia, 1977
* Lustosa, Isabel. D. Pedro I: um herói sem nenhum caráter. São Paulo: Companhia das letras, 2006. 
* Moreira, Igor A. G. O Espaço Geográfico, geografia geral e do Brasil. 18. Ed. São Paulo: Ática, 1981
* Munro, Dana Gardner. The Latin American Republics; A History. New York: D. Appleton, 1942.
* Peres, Damião (1949) O Descobrimento do Brasil por Pedro Álvares Cabral: antecedentes e intencionalidade Porto: Portucalense.
* Scheina, Robert L. Latin America: A Naval History, 1810–1987. Annapolis, MD: Naval Institute Press, 1987. 
* 
* Stuart B. Schwartz Sovereignty and Society in Colonial Brazil (1973)
 * Early Latin America (1983)
 * Sugar Plantations in the Formation of Brazilian Society (1985)
* Skidmore, Thomas E. Brazil: Five Centuries of Change (Oxford University Press, 1999)
 * Uma História do Brasil. 4th ed. São Paulo: Paz e Terra, 2003. 
* Souza, Adriana Barreto de. Duque de Caxias: o homem por trás do monumento. Rio de Janeiro: Civilização Brasileira, 2008. .
* 
* Vainfas, Ronaldo. Dicionário do Brasil Imperial. Rio de Janeiro: Objetiva, 2002. 
* Vesentini, José William. Brasil, sociedade e espaço – Geografia do Brasil. 7th Ed. São Paulo: Ática, 1988
* Vianna, Hélio. História do Brasil: período colonial, monarquia e república, 15th ed. São Paulo: Melhoramentos, 1994
* Zirin, Dave. Brazil's Dance with the Devil: The World Cup, The Olympics, and the Fight for Democracy Haymarket Books 2014. 


 Further reading 

* Alencastro Felipe, Luiz Felipe de. The Trade in the Living: The Formation of Brazil in the South Atlantic, Sixteenth to Seventeenth Centuries (SUNY Press,  2019) 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Levine, Robert M. Historical Dictionary of Brazil (2019)
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


 External links 
<!--     

Please be cautious adding more external links.

Wikipedia is not a collection of links and should not be used for advertising.

Excessive or inappropriate links will be removed.

See Wikipedia:External links and Wikipedia:Spam for details.

If there are already suitable links, propose additions or replacements on
the article's talk page, or submit your link to the relevant category at
the Open Directory Project (dmoz.org) and link there using .

-->

Government
* [https://www.gov.br/ Brazilian Federal Government]
* [http://www.visitbrasil.com/en/ Official Tourist Guide of Brazil]
* [http://www.ibge.gov.br/english/ Brazilian Institute of Geography and Statistics]
* 
* 




}}