{{Infobox settlement
| name                     = Okinawa Prefecture
| native_name              = 沖縄県
| native_name_lang         = ja
| settlement_type          = Prefecture
| translit_lang1           = Native
| translit_lang1_type1     = Japanese
| translit_lang1_info1     = 
| image_skyline            = Yubu Island Okinawa Pref Japan24n4200.jpg
| image_caption            = Tourists on traditional buffalo carts arrive at Yubu-jima Island, in Taketomi,Taketomi Town, Yaeyama District,Yaeyama District, Okinawa Prefecture
| image_flag               = Flag of Okinawa Prefecture.svg
| flag_size                = 100px
| image_blank_emblem       = Emblem of Okinawa Prefecture.svg
| blank_emblem_size        = 80px
| blank_emblem_type        = Symbol
| image_map                = File:Map of Japan with 47 Okinawa prefecture.svg
| coordinates              = 
| subdivision_type         = Country
| subdivision_name         = 
| subdivision_type1        = Region
| subdivision_name1        = Kyushu
| subdivision_type2        = Island
| subdivision_name2        = Okinawa, Daitō, Miyako, Yaeyama, and Senkaku
| seat_type                = Capital
| seat                     = Naha
| parts_type               = Subdivisions
| parts_style              = para
| p1                       = Districts: 5
| p2                       = Municipalities: 41
| leader_title             = Governor
| leader_name              = Denny Tamaki
| area_total_km2           = 2281
| area_water_percent       = 0.5
| area_rank                = 44th
| population_footnotes     = 
| population_total         = 1466870
| population_as_of         = May 1, 2020
| population_rank          = 29th
| population_density_km2   = auto
| iso_code                 = JP-47
| website                  = 
| module                   = {{ embedded=Yes
| country  = Japan
| bird     = Okinawa woodpecker (Sapheopipo noguchii)
| fish     = Banana fish (Pterocaesio diagramma, "takasago", "gurukun")
| flower   = Deego (Erythrina variegata)
| tree     = Pinus luchuensis ("ryūkyūmatsu")
}}
| official_name            = 
| anthem                   = :ja:沖縄県民の歌 (Okinawa kenmin no uta)
}}
) and a geographic area of 2,281 km<sup>2</sup> (880 sq mi).

Naha is the capital and largest city of Okinawa Prefecture, with other major cities including Okinawa, Uruma, and Urasoe,Urasoe.<ref>Nussbaum, "Naha" in  southwest from the Satsunan Islands of Kagoshima Prefecture to Taiwan (Hualien and Yilan County,Yilan Counties). Okinawa Prefecture's largest island, Okinawa Island, is the home to a majority of Okinawa's population. Okinawa Prefecture's indigenous ethnic group are the Ryukyuan people, who also live in the Amami Islands of Kagoshima Prefecture.

Okinawa Prefecture was ruled by the Ryukyu Kingdom from 1429 and unofficially annexed by Japan after the Invasion of Ryukyu in 1609. Okinawa Prefecture was officially founded in 1879 by the Empire of Japan after seven years as the Ryukyu Domain, the last domain of the Han system. Okinawa Prefecture was occupied by the United States of America during the Allied occupation of Japan after World War II, and governed by the Military Government of the Ryukyu Islands from 1945 to 1950 and Civil Administration of the Ryukyu Islands from 1950 until the prefecture was returned to Japan in 1972. Okinawa Prefecture comprises just 0.6 percent of Japan's total land mass but about 26,000 (75%) of United States Forces Japan personnel are assigned to the prefecture; the continued U.S. military presence in Okinawa is controversial.<ref></ref>



History




The oldest evidence of human existence on the Ryukyu islands is from the Stone Age and was discovered in Naha,Naha<ref name="yamashita01">

The first mention of the word Ryukyu was written in the Book of Sui.</ref> Since the islands are located at the eastern perimeter of the East China Sea relatively close to Japan, China and South-East Asia, the Ryukyu Kingdom became a prosperous trading nation. Also during this period, many Gusukus, similar to castles, were constructed. The Ryukyu Kingdom entered into the Imperial Chinese tributary system under the Ming dynasty beginning in the 15th century, which established economic relations between the two nations.

In 1609, the Shimazu clan, which controlled the region that is now Kagoshima Prefecture, invaded the Ryukyu Kingdom. The Ryukyu Kingdom was obliged to agree to form a suzerain-vassal relationship with the Satsuma and the Tokugawa shogunate, while maintaining its previous role within the Chinese tributary system; Ryukyuan sovereignty was maintained since complete annexation would have created a conflict with China. The Satsuma clan earned considerable profits from trade with China during a period in which foreign trade was heavily restricted by the shogunate.



Although Satsuma maintained strong influence over the islands, the Ryukyu Kingdom maintained a considerable degree of domestic political freedom for over two hundred years. Four years after the 1868 Meiji Restoration, the Japanese government, through military incursions, officially annexed the kingdom and renamed it Ryukyu han. At the time, the Qing Empire asserted a nominal suzerainty over the islands of the Ryukyu Kingdom, since the Ryūkyū Kingdom was also a member state of the Chinese tributary system. Ryukyu han became Okinawa Prefecture of Japan in 1879, even though all other hans had become prefectures of Japan in 1872. In 1912, Okinawans first obtained the right to vote for representatives to the  which had been established in 1890.<ref>Steve Rabson, "Meiji Assimilation Policy in Okinawa: Promotion, Resistance, and "Reconstruction" in New Directions in the Study of Meiji Japan (Helen Hardacre, ed.). Brill, 1997. p. 642.</ref>

1945–1965
Near the end of World War II, in 1945, the US Army and Marine Corps launched an invasion of Okinawa with 185,000 troops. They were faced with fanatical resistance from the Japanese defenders. A third of Okinawa's civilian population were killed during the ensuing fighting;<ref name="economist"></ref> a quarter of the civilian population died during the 1945 Battle of Okinawa alone.<ref name=Guardian110307/> The dead, of all nationalities, are commemorated at the Cornerstone of Peace.

After the end of World War II, the United States set up the United States Military Government of the Ryukyu Islands administration, which ruled Okinawa for 27 years. During this "trusteeship rule", the United States established numerous military bases on the Ryukyu islands. The Ryukyu independence movement was an Okinawan movement that clamored against U.S. rule.

Continued U.S. military buildup
During the Korean War, B-29 Superfortresses flew bombing missions over Korea from Kadena Air Base on Okinawa. The military buildup on the island during the Cold War increased a division between local inhabitants and the American military. Under the 1952 Treaty of Mutual Cooperation and Security between the United States and Japan, United States Forces Japan (USFJ) have maintained a large military presence.
 
During the mid-1950s, the U.S. seized land from Okinawans to build new bases or expand currently-existing ones. According to the Melvin Price Report, by 1955, the military had displaced 250,000 residents.<ref></ref>

Secret U.S. deployment of nuclear weapons
Since 1960, the U.S. and Japan have maintained an agreement that allows the U.S. to secretly bring nuclear weapons into Japanese ports.<ref name="NHK01"></ref> In Fall 1960, U.S. commandos in Green Light Teams secret training missions carried actual small nuclear weapons on the east coast of Okinawa Island.<ref>Annie Jacobsen, "Surprise, Kill, Vanish: The Secret History of CIA Paramilitary Armies, Operators, and Assassins," (New York: Little, Brown and Company, 2019), p. 102</ref>

1965–1972 (Vietnam War)
Between 1965 and 1972, Okinawa was a key staging point for United States in its military operations directed towards North Vietnam. Along with Guam, it presented a geographically strategic launch pad for covert bombing missions over Cambodia and Laos.<ref>John Morrocco. Rain of Fire. (United States: Boston Publishing Company), pg 14</ref> Anti-Vietnam War sentiment became linked politically to the movement for reversion of Okinawa to Japan.
In 1965, the US military bases, earlier viewed as paternal post war protection, were increasingly seen as aggressive. The Vietnam War highlighted the differences between United States and Okinawa, but showed a commonality between the islands and mainland Japan.<ref name="NYT65"></ref>

As controversy grew regarding the alleged placement of nuclear weapons on Okinawa, fears intensified over the escalation of the Vietnam War. Okinawa was then perceived, by some inside Japan, as a potential target for China, should the communist government feel threatened by United States.<ref>Mori, Kyozo, Two Ends of a Telescope Japanese and American Views of Okinawa, Japan Quarterly, 15:1 (1968:Jan./Mar.) p.17</ref> American military secrecy blocked any local reporting on what was actually occurring at bases such as Kadena Air Base. As information leaked out, and images of air strikes were published, the local population began to fear the potential for retaliation.<ref name=NYT65 />

Political leaders such as Oda Makoto, a major figure in the Beheiren movement (Foundation of Citizens for Peace in Vietnam), believed, that the return of Okinawa to Japan would lead to the removal of U.S. forces ending Japan's involvement in Vietnam.<ref name="Havens, T. R. H. 1987 Pg 120">Havens, T. R. H. (1987) Fire Across the Sea: The Vietnam War and Japan, 1965–1975. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Pg 120</ref> In a speech delivered in 1967 Oda was critical of Prime Minister Sato's unilateral support of America's War in Vietnam claiming "Realistically we are all guilty of complicity in the Vietnam War".<ref name="Havens, T. R. H. 1987 Pg 120"/> The Beheiren became a more visible anti-war movement on Okinawa as the American involvement in Vietnam intensified. The movement employed tactics ranging from demonstrations, to handing leaflets to soldiers, sailors, airmen and Marines directly, warning of the implications for a third World War.<ref>Havens, T. R. H. (1987) Fire Across the Sea: The Vietnam War and Japan, 1965–1975. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press. Pg 123</ref>


The US military bases on Okinawa became a focal point for anti-Vietnam War sentiment. By 1969, over 50,000 American military personnel were stationed on Okinawa.<ref>Christopher T. Sanders (2000) America’s Overseas Garrisons the Leasehold Empire Oxford University Press PG 164</ref> United States Department of Defense began referring to Okinawa as the "Keystone of the Pacific". This slogan was imprinted on local U.S. military license plates.<ref>Havens, T. R. H. (1987) Fire Across the Sea: The Vietnam War and Japan, 1965–1975. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press Pg 88</ref>

In 1969, chemical weapons leaked from the US storage depot at Chibana in central Okinawa, under Operation Red Hat. Evacuations of residents took place over a wide area for two months. Even two years later, government investigators found that Okinawans and the environment near the leak were still suffering because of the depot.<ref name="APJ2014"></ref>

On May 15, 1972, the U.S. government handed over the islands to Japanese administration.<ref></ref>

1973–2006
In a 1981 interview with the Mainichi Shimbun, Edwin O. Reischauer, former U.S. ambassador to Japan, said that U.S. naval ships armed with nuclear weapons stopped at Japanese ports on a routine duty, and this was approved by the Japanese government.

The 1995 rape of a 12-year-old girl by U.S. servicemen triggered large protests in Okinawa. Reports by the local media of accidents and crimes committed by U.S. servicemen have reduced the local population's support for the U.S. military bases. A strong emotional response has emerged from certain incidents. As a result, the media has drawn renewed interest in the Ryukyu independence movement.

Documents declassified in 1997 proved that both tactical and strategic weapons have been maintained in Okinawa.<ref name=APJ2014/><ref>, Okinawa Times, May 16, 1999</ref> On October 25, 2005, after a decade of negotiations, the governments of the US and Japan officially agreed to move Marine Corps Air Station Futenma from its location in the densely populated city of Ginowan,Ginowan to the more northerly and remote Camp Schwab in Nago,Nago by building a heliport with a shorter runway, partly on Camp Schwab land and partly running into the sea.<ref name=economist/> The move is partly an attempt to relieve tensions between the people of Okinawa and the Marine Corps.

Okinawa prefecture constitutes 0.6 percent of Japan's land surface,<ref name=economist /> yet , Japan Ministry of Defense</ref>



2007–present
According to a 2007 Okinawa Times poll, 85 percent of Okinawans opposed the presence of the U.S. military,<ref></ref> Okinawan feelings about the U.S. military are complex, and some of the resentment towards the U.S. bases is directed towards the government in Tokyo, perceived as being insensitive to Okinawan needs and using Okinawa to house bases not desired elsewhere in Japan.

In early 2008, U.S. Secretary of State Condoleezza Rice apologized after a series of crimes involving American troops in Japan, including the rape of a young girl of 14 by a Marine on Okinawa. The U.S. military also imposed a temporary 24-hour curfew on military personnel and their families to ease the anger of local residents.<ref></ref>

Between 1972 and 2009, U.S. servicemen committed 5,634 criminal offenses, including 25 murders, 385 burglaries, 25 arsons, 127 rapes, 306 assaults and 2,827 thefts.<ref name="Guardian110307"></ref>

In 2009, a new Japanese government came to power and froze the US forces relocation plan, but in April 2010 indicated their interest in resolving the issue by proposing a modified plan.<ref></ref>

A study done in 2010 found that the prolonged exposure to aircraft noise around the Kadena Air Base and other military bases cause health issues such as a disrupted sleep pattern, high blood pressure, weakening of the immune system in children, and a loss of hearing.<ref></ref>

In 2011, it was reported that the U.S. military—contrary to repeated denials by the Pentagon—had kept tens of thousands of barrels of Agent Orange on the island. The Japanese and American governments have angered some U.S. veterans, who believe they were poisoned by Agent Orange while serving on the island, by characterizing their statements regarding Agent Orange as "dubious", and ignoring their requests for compensation. Reports that more than a third of the barrels developed leaks have led Okinawans to ask for environmental investigations, but  The Asia-Pacific Journal: Japan Focus, Vol 10, Issue 51, No. 2, December 17, 2012.</ref>

On September 30, 2018, Denny Tamaki was elected as the next governor of Okinawa prefecture, after a campaign focused on sharply reducing the U.S. military presence on the island.<ref></ref>

 Marine Corps Air Station Futenma relocation, 2006–present 


</ref>

In 2009, Japan's former foreign minister Katsuya Okada stated that he wanted to review the deployment of U.S. troops in Japan to ease the burden on the people of Okinawa (Associated Press, October 7, 2009), occupying 18 percent of the main island. Okinawa hosts about two-thirds of the 50,000 American forces in Japan although the islands account for less than one percent of total lands in Japan.<ref name="USMilitaryBases"/>

Since December 2014, the relocation of Marine Corps Air Station Futenma has been a major issue. First promised to be moved off the island and then later within the island, the future of any relocation is uncertain with the election of base-opponent Onaga as Okinawa governor.<ref name="bbc-onaga"></ref>

Suburbs have grown towards and now surround two historic major bases, Futenma and Kadena. A sizeable portion of the land used by the U.S. military is the Marine Corps Northern Training Area (known also as Camp Gonsalves or JWTC) in the north of the island.<ref></ref>

Helipads construction in Takae (Yanbaru forest)
Since the early 2000s, Okinawans have opposed the presence of American troops helipads in the Takae zone of the Yanbaru forest near Higashi,Higashi and Kunigami,Kunigami.<ref></ref>

Geography



Major islands


The islands comprising the prefecture are the southern two thirds of the archipelago of the . Okinawa's inhabited islands are typically divided into three geographical archipelagos. From northeast to southwest:
* 
 * Iejima ()
 * Kumejima,Kume-jima ()
 * Okinawa Island ()
 * Kerama Islands ()
* Miyako Islands ()
 * Miyako-jima
* Yaeyama Islands ()
 * Iriomote Island ()
 * Ishigaki Island ()
 * Yonaguni ()
* Senkaku Islands ()
* Daitō Islands ()
 * Minamidaitōjima ()
 * Kitadaitōjima ()
 * Okidaitōjima ()

Natural parks
As of March 31, 2019, 36 percent of the total land area of the prefecture was designated as Natural Parks, namely the Iriomote-Iriomote-Ishigaki, Kerama Shotō, and Yanbaru National Parks; Okinawa Kaigan Quasi-Okinawa Kaigan and Okinawa Senseki Quasi-Okinawa Senseki Quasi-National Parks; and Irabu, Kumejima, Tarama, and Tonaki Prefectural Natural Parks.<ref></ref>

Fauna
The dugong is an endangered marine mammal related to the manatee.<ref name="CBD"></ref> The sea turtles return yearly to the southern islands of Okinawa to lay their eggs. The summer months carry warnings to swimmers regarding venomous jellyfish and other dangerous sea creatures.

Flora
Okinawa is a major producer of sugar cane, pineapple, papaya, and other tropical fruit, and the Southeast Botanical Gardens represent tropical plant species.






Geology
The island is largely composed of coral, and rainwater filtering through that coral has given the island many caves, which played an important role in the Battle of Okinawa. Gyokusendo<ref></ref> is an extensive limestone cave in the southern part of Okinawa's main island.

Climate
The island experiences temperatures above </ref>

Municipalities

Cities




Eleven cities are located within the Okinawa Prefecture:
{| class="wikitable sortable"
! colspan="5"Name
! rowspan="3"Area (km<sup>2</sup>)
! rowspan="3"Population
! rowspan="3"Map
|-
! rowspan="2"Rōmaji
! rowspan="2"Kanji
! colspan="2"Okinawan<ref name=":0"></ref>
! rowspan="2"other languages [script]
(name in brackets)
|-
!Kana
!Rōmaji
|-
|
|宜野湾市
|じのーん
|Jinōn
|
|19.51
|94,405
|
|-
|
|石垣市
|いしがち
|ʔIshigaci
|Isïgaksï, Ishanagzï (Yaeyama)
|229
|47,562
|
|-
|
|糸満市
|いちゅまん
|ʔIcuman
|
|46.63
|59,605
|
|-
|
|宮古島市
|なーく、みゃーく
|Nāku, Myāku
|Myaaku (Miyakoan)
|204.54
|54,908
|
|-
|
|名護市
|なぐ
|Nagu
|Naguu [ナグー] (Kunigami)
|210.37
|61,659
|
|-
| (capital)
|那覇市
|な
|Nafa
|
|39.98
|317,405
|
|-
|
|南城市
|く
|Fēgusiku
|
|49.69
|41,305
|
|-
|
|沖縄市
|うちなー
|ʔUcinā
|
|49
|138,431
|
|-
|
|豊見城市
|く
|Timigusiku
|
|19.6
|61,613
|
|-
|
|浦添市
|うらー
|ʔUrasī
|
|19.09
|113,992
|
|-
|
|うるま市
|うるま
|ʔUruma
|
|86
|118,330
|
|}

Towns and villages
These are the towns and villages in each district:
{| class="wikitable sortable"
! colspan="5"Name
! rowspan="3"Area (km<sup>2</sup>)
! rowspan="3"Population
! rowspan="3"District
! rowspan="3"Type
! rowspan="3"Map
|-
! rowspan="2"Rōmaji
! rowspan="2"Kanji
! colspan="2"Okinawan<ref name=":0" />
! rowspan="2"other languages [script]

(name in brackets)
|-
!Kana
!Rōmaji
|-
|
|粟国村
|あぐに
|ʔAguni
|
|7.63
|772
|Shimajiri District,Shimajiri District
|Village
|
|-
|
|北谷町
|ちゃたん
|Catan
|
|13.62
|28,578
|Nakagami District,Nakagami District
|Town
|
|-
|
|宜野座村
|じぬざ
|Jinuza
|
|31.28
|5,544
|Kunigami District,Kunigami District
|Village
|
|-
|
|南風原町
|ーばる
|Fēbaru
|
|10.72
|37,874
|Shimajiri District,Shimajiri District
|Town
|
|-
|
|東村
|がし
|Figashi
|Agaarijimaa [アガーリジマー] 
(Kunigami)
|81.79
|1,683
|Kunigami District,Kunigami District
|Village
|
|-
|
|伊江村
|いい
|ʔIi
|Ii [イー] (Kunigami)
|22.75
|4,192
|Kunigami District,Kunigami District
|Village
|
|-
|
|伊平屋村
|いひゃ、後地
|ʔIhya, Kushijī
|
|21.72
|1,214
|Shimajiri District,Shimajiri District
|Village
|
|-
|
|伊是名村
|いじな、前地
|ʔIjina, Mējī
|
|15.42
|1,518
|Shimajiri District,Shimajiri District
|Village
|
|-
|
|嘉手納町
|かなー
|Kadinā
|
|15.04
|13,671
|Nakagami District,Nakagami District
|Town
|
|-
|
|金武町
|ちん
|Cin
|Chin [チン] (Kunigami)
|37.57
|11,259
|Kunigami District,Kunigami District
|Town
|
|-
|
|北大東村
|うふあがりじま
|
|
|13.1
|615
|Shimajiri District,Shimajiri District
|Village
|
|-
|
|北中城村
|にしなかーぐく
|Nishinakāgusiku
|
|11.53
|16,040
|Nakagami District,Nakagami District
|Village
|
|-
|
|久米島町
|くみじま
|Kumijima
|
|63.5
|7,647
|Shimajiri District,Shimajiri District
|Town
|
|-
|
|国頭村
|くんじゃん
|Kunjan
|Kunzan (Kunigami)
|194.8
|4,908
|Kunigami District,Kunigami District
|Village
|
|-
|
|南大東村
|ーうふあがりじま
|
|
|30.57
|1,418
|Shimajiri District,Shimajiri District
|Village
|
|-
|
|本部町
|むぶ
|Mutubu
|Mutubu (Kunigami)
|54.3
|13,441
|Kunigami District,Kunigami District
|Town
|
|-
|
|中城村
|なかーぐく
|Nakāgusiku
|
|15.46
|20,030
|Nakagami District,Nakagami District
|Village
|
|-
|
|今帰仁村
|なちじん
|Nacijin
|Nachizin (Kunigami)
|39.87
|9,529
|Kunigami District,Kunigami District
|Village
|
|-
|
|西原町
|にしばる
|Nishibaru
|
|15.84
|34,463
|Nakagami District,Nakagami District
|Town
|
|-
|
|大宜味村
|じみ
|’Ujimi
|Uujimii (Kunigami)
|63.12
|3,024
|Kunigami District,Kunigami District
|Village
|
|-
|
|恩納村
|うんな
|ʔUnna
|Unna (Kunigami)
|50.77
|10,443
|Kunigami District,Kunigami District
|Village
|
|-
|
|多良間村
|たらま
|Tarama
|Tarama (Miyakoan)
|21.91
|1,194
|Miyako District,Miyako District
|Village
|
|-
|
|竹富町
|だきん
|Dakidun
|Teedun (Yaeyama)
|334.02
|4,050
|Yaeyama District,Yaeyama District
|Town
|
|-
|
|渡嘉敷村
|かしち
|Tukashici
|
|19.18
|697
|Shimajiri District,Shimajiri District
|Village
|
|-
|
|渡名喜村
|なち
|Tunaci
|
|3.74
|406
|Shimajiri District,Shimajiri District
|Village
|
|-
|
|八重瀬町
|え゙ー
|’Ēsi
|
|26.9
|29,488
|Shimajiri District,Shimajiri District
|Town
|
|-
|
|読谷村
|んたん
|’Yuntan
|
|35.17
|40,517
|Nakagami District,Nakagami District
|Village
|
|-
|
|与那原町
|なばる
|’Yunabaru
|
|5.18
|18,410
|Shimajiri District,Shimajiri District
|Town
|
|-
|
|与那国町
|なぐに
|’Yunaguni
|Dunan, Juni (Yonaguni)
Yunoon (Yaeyama)
|28.95
|2,048
|Yaeyama District,Yaeyama District
|Town
|
|-
|
|座間味村
|ざまみ
|Zamami
|
|16.74
|924
|Shimajiri District,Shimajiri District
|Village
|
|}

Town mergers


Demography


 Ethnic groups 
The indigenous Ryukyuan people make up the majority of Okinawa Prefecture's population, and are also the main ethnic group of the Amami Islands to the north. Large Okinawan diaspora communities persist in places such as South America<ref></ref> The prefecture also has a sizable minority of Yamato people from mainland Japan; exact population numbers are difficult to establish, as the Japanese government does not officially recognise Ryukyuans as a distinct ethnic group from Yamatos.

The overall ethnic identity of Okinawa residents is rather split. According to a telephone poll conducted by Lim John Chuan-tiong, an associate professor with the University of the Ryukyus, 40.6% of respondents identified as “ (Japanese)” and 36.5% identified as both.

 Population 
<div style="width:33%;float:left">
Okinawa prefecture age pyramid </ref><br />
(per thousands of people)
{|
|-
! Age
! People
|-
|0–4
| 84
|-
|5–9
| 85
|-
|10–14
| 87
|-
|15–19
| 94
|-
|20–24
| 91
|-
|25–29
| 97
|-
|30–34
| 99
|-
|35–39
| 87
|-
|40–44
| 91
|-
|45–49
| 96
|-
|50–54
| 100
|-
|55–59
| 64
|-
|60–64
| 65
|-
|65–69
| 66
|-
|70–74
| 53
|-
|75–79
| 37
|-
|80 +
| 55
|}
</div>
<div style="width:33%; float:left; padding-left: 25px;">
Okinawa Prefecture age pyramid, divided by sex, <br />
(per thousands of people)
{|
|-
! align=Males
! align=Age
! Females
|-
| align=43 
| align=0–4
| 41
|-
| align=44 
| align=5–9
| 41
|-
| align=45 
| align=10–14
| 42
|-
| align=48 
| align=15–19
| 46
|-
| align=46 
| align=20–24
| 45
|-
| align=49 
| align=25–29
| 48
|-
| align=49 
| align=30–34
| 50
|-
| align=43 
| align=35–39
| 44
|-
| align=46 
| align=40–44
| 45
|-
| align=49 
| align=45–49
| 47
|-
| align=52 
| align=50–54
| 48
|-
| align=32 
| align=55–59
| 32
|-
| align=32 
| align=60–64
| 33
|-
| align=32 
| align=65–69
| 34
|-
| align=24 
| align=70–74
| 29
|-
| align=14 
| align=75–79
| 23
|-
| align=17 
| align=80 +
| 38
|}
</div>


Per Japanese census data,<ref></ref> Okinawa prefecture has had continuous positive population growth since 1960.

{{Historical populations
|   166,789
|   572,000
|   578,000
|   575,000
|   915,000
|   883,000
|   945,000
| 1,107,000
| 1,222,000
| 1,318,220
| 1,392,818
| 1,457,162
|align       = none
| footnote = 
}}

Language and culture







Having been a separate nation until 1879, Okinawan language and culture differ in many ways from those of mainland Japan.

Language


There remain six Ryukyuan languages which, although related, are incomprehensible to speakers of Japanese. One of the Ryukyuan languages is spoken in Kagoshima Prefecture, rather than in Okinawa Prefecture. These languages are in decline as the younger generation of Okinawans uses Standard Japanese. Mainland Japanese - and some Okinawans themselves - generally perceive the Ryukyuan languages as "dialects". Standard Japanese is almost always used in formal situations. In informal situations, de facto everyday language among Okinawans under age 60 is Okinawa-accented mainland Japanese ("Okinawan Japanese"), which is often mistaken by non-Okinawans as the Okinawan language proper. The actual traditional Okinawan language is still used in traditional cultural activities, such as folk music and folk dance. There is a radio-news program in the language as well.<ref>
[http://www.okinawabbtv.com/news/h_news.htm おきなわBBtv★沖縄の方言ニュース★沖縄の「今」を沖縄の「言葉」で！ラジオ沖縄で好評放送中の「方言ニュース」をブロードバンドでお届けします。] . Okinawabbtv.com. Retrieved on August 16, 2013.
</ref>

Religion

Okinawans have traditionally followed Ryukyuan religious beliefs, generally characterized by ancestor worship and the respecting of relationships between the living, the dead, and the gods and spirits of the natural world.<ref></ref>

Cultural influences
Okinawan culture bears traces of its various trading partners. One can find Chinese, Thai and Austronesian influences in the island's customs. Perhaps Okinawa's most famous cultural export is karate, probably a product of the close ties with and influence of China on Okinawan culture. Karate is thought to be a synthesis of Chinese kung fu with traditional Okinawan martial arts.

A traditional Okinawan product that owes its existence to Okinawa's trading history is awamori—an Okinawan distilled spirit made from indica rice imported from Thailand.

Other cultural characteristics
<!-----no article on Kinjo, nn. no citations despite months of waiting--
The people of Okinawa maintain a strong tradition of pottery, textiles, and glass making. Potter Jiro Kinjo was designated a Living National Treasure for traditional Okinawan pottery in 1985,<ref>http://www.e-yakimono.net/html/living-natl-treasures.htm 
--->

Other prominent examples of Okinawan culture include the sanshin—a three-stringed Okinawan instrument, closely related to the Chinese sanxian, and ancestor of the Japanese shamisen, somewhat similar to a banjo. Its body is often bound with snakeskin (from pythons, imported from elsewhere in Asia, rather than from Okinawa's venomous Trimeresurus flavoviridis, which are too small for this purpose). Okinawan culture also features the eisa dance, a traditional drumming dance. A traditional craft, the fabric named bingata, is made in workshops on the main island and elsewhere.<ref></ref>

The Okinawan diet consists of low-fat, low-salt foods, such as whole fruits and vegetables, legumes, tofu, and seaweed. Okinawans are particularly well known for consuming purple potatoes, also known as Okinawan sweet potatoes.<ref>

A cultural feature of the Okinawans is the forming of moais. A </ref>

In recent years,</ref>

Karate


Karate originated in Okinawa. Over time, it developed into several styles and sub-styles. On Okinawa, the three main styles are considered to be Shōrin-ryū, Gōjū-ryū and Uechi-ryū. Internationally, the various styles and sub-styles include Matsubayashi-ryū, Wadō-ryū, Isshin-ryū, Shōrinkan, Shotokan, Shitō-ryū, Shōrinjiryū Kenkōkan, Shorinjiryu Koshinkai, and Shōrinji-ryū.

Architecture



Despite widespread destruction during World War II, there are many remains of a unique type of castle or fortress known as gusuku; the most significant are now inscribed on the UNESCO World Heritage List (Gusuku Sites and Related Properties of the Kingdom of Ryukyu).<ref></ref> Shuri Castle in Naha is an UNESCO World Heritage Site.

Whereas most homes in Japan are made from wood and allow free-flow of air to combat humidity, typical modern homes in Okinawa are made from concrete with barred windows to protect from flying plant debris and to withstand regular typhoons. Roofs are designed with strong winds in mind, in which each tile is cemented on and not merely layered as seen with many homes in Japan. The Nakamura House (:ja:中村家住宅 (沖縄県)) is an original 18th century farmhouse in Kitanakagusuki.

Many roofs also display a lion-dog statue, called a shisa, which is said to protect the home from danger. Roofs are typically red in color and are inspired by Chinese design.<ref></ref>

Education

The public schools in Okinawa are overseen by the Okinawa Prefectural Board of Education. The agency directly operates several public high schools<ref></ref> including Okinawa Shogaku High School. The U.S. Department of Defense Dependents Schools (DoDDS) operates 13 schools total in Okinawa. Seven of these schools are located on Kadena Air Base.

Okinawa has many types of private schools. Some of them are cram schools, also known as juku. Others, such as Nova, solely teach language. People also attend small language schools.<ref>

There are 10 colleges/universities in Okinawa, including the University of the Ryukyus, the only national university in the prefecture, and the Okinawa Institute of Science and Technology, a new international research institute. Okinawa's American military bases also host the Asian Division of the University of Maryland University College.

Sports

;Association football
* FC Ryukyu (Naha,Naha)
;Basketball
* Ryukyu Golden Kings (Naha,Naha)
;Handball
* Ryukyu Corazon<ref></ref> (Naha,Naha)
;Baseball

Announced on July 18, 2019, BASE Okinawa Baseball Club will be forming the first-ever professional baseball team on Okinawa, the Ryukyu Blue Oceans. The team is expected to be fully organized by January 2020 and intends on joining the Nippon Professional Baseball league.<ref></ref>

In addition, various baseball teams from Japan hold training during the winter in Okinawa prefecture as it is the warmest prefecture of Japan with no snow and higher temperatures than other prefectures.

* SoftBank Hawks
* Yokohama BayStars
* Chunichi Dragons
* Yakult Swallows
;Golf
There are numerous golf courses in the prefecture, and there was formerly a professional tournament called the Okinawa Open.

Transportation


Air transportation
* Aguni Airport
* Hateruma Airport
* Iejima Airport
* New Ishigaki Airport
* Kerama Airport
* Kitadaito Airport
* Kumejima Airport
* Minami-Daito Airport
* Miyako Airport
* Naha Airport
* Shimojishima Airport
* Tarama Airport
* Yonaguni Airport

Highways
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

Rail

* Okinawa Urban Monorail

Ports
The major ports of Okinawa include:
* Naha Port<ref>[http://www.nahaport.jp/pro_us/index.htm Naha port] . Nahaport.jp. Retrieved on August 16, 2013.</ref>
* Port of Unten<ref>. Pref.okinawa.jp. Retrieved on August 16, 2013.</ref>
* Port of Kinwan<ref>. Pref.okinawa.jp. Retrieved on August 16, 2013.</ref>
* Nakagusukuwan Port<ref>[http://www.dc.ogb.go.jp/nakagusukuwankou/ 沖縄総合事務局 那覇港湾・空港整備事務所 中城湾港出張所] . Dc.ogb.go.jp. Retrieved on August 16, 2013.</ref>
* Hirara Port<ref>[http://www.dc.ogb.go.jp/hirarakou/ 平良港湾事務所] . Dc.ogb.go.jp. Retrieved on August 16, 2013.</ref>
* Port of Ishigaki<ref></ref>

Economy
The 34 US military installations on Okinawa are financially supported by the U.S. and Japan.<ref name=huff/> The bases provide jobs for Okinawans, both directly and indirectly; In 2011, the U.S. military employed over 9,800 Japanese workers in Okinawa.<ref name="huff"></ref>
</ref>

The Okinawa Convention and Visitors Bureau is exploring the possibility of using facilities on the military bases for large-scale Meetings, incentives, conferencing, exhibitions events.<ref></ref>

United States military installations



* United States Marine Corps
 * Marine Corps Base Camp Smedley D. Butler
  * Camp Foster
  * Marine Corps Air Station Futenma
  * Camp Kinser
  * Camp Courtney
  * Camp McTureous
  * Camp Hansen
  * Camp Schwab
  * Camp Gonsalves (Jungle Warfare Training Center)
* United States Air Force
 *Kadena Air Base
 *[https://web.archive.org/web/20190321171347/https://kadenafss.com/okuma/ Okuma Beach Resort]
* United States Navy
 * Camp Lester (Camp Kuwae)<ref>[http://www.globalsecurity.org/military/facility/camp-kuwae.htm Camp Lester (Camp Kuwae)] . Globalsecurity.org (December 2, 1996). Retrieved on 2013-08-16.</ref>
 * Camp Shields
 * Naval Facility White Beach
* United States Army
 * Torii Station
 * Fort Buckner
 * Naha Military Port

Notable people

* Gichin Funakoshi who led the efforts to propagate Okinawa karate to the Japanese mainland and beyond to the World.
* Yoshitaka Funakoshi (Gichin's son) who, with his father, made significant and innovative contributions to Okinawan karate leading to the style known as Shotokan.
* Chōjun Miyagi founder of Gōjū-ryū, "hard/soft" style of Okinawan Karate.
* Uechi Kanbun was the founder of Uechi-ryū, one of the primary karate styles of Okinawa.
* Mitsuru Ushijima was the Japanese general at the Battle of Okinawa during the final stages of World War II.
* Isamu Chō was an officer in the Imperial Japanese Army known for his support of ultranationalist politics and involvement in a number of attempted military and right-wing coup d'états in pre-World War II Japan.
* Ōta Minoru was an admiral in the Imperial Japanese Navy during World War II, and the final commander of the Japanese naval forces defending the Oroku Peninsula during the Battle of Okinawa.
* Sato Eisaku was a Japanese politician and the 61st, 62nd and 63rd Prime Minister of Japan. While he was premier in 1972, Okinawa was returned to Japan.
* Yabu Kentsū was a prominent teacher of Shōrin-ryū karate in Okinawa from the 1910s until the 1930s, and was among the first people to demonstrate karate in Hawaii.
* Takuji Iwasaki was a meteorologist, biologist, ethnologist historian.
* Matayoshi Eiki Okinawan novel writer, winner of Akutagawa prize
* Gackt Japanese pop rock singer-songwriter, actor, author
* Saori Minami Japanese kayōkyoku pop singer
* Namie Amuro Japanese R&B, hip hop and pop singer
* Beni Japanese pop and R&B singer
*Ben Shepherd Bassist of the band Soundgarden 
*Noriyuki Sugasawa basketball player
* Orange Range Japanese rock band
* Stereopony Japanese all-female pop rock band
* Tamlyn Tomita actress and singer
* Rino Nakasone Razalan professional dancer and choreographer.
* Yukie Nakama singer, musician and actress
* Daichi Miura Japanese pop singer, dancer and choreographer.
* Yui Aragaki actress, singer, and model
* Hearts Grow Japanese band
* Aisa Senda, Japanese singer, actress and TV presenter in Taiwan
* Robert Griffin III, American football quarterback, Heisman Trophy winner
* Dave Roberts, Major League Baseball player and manager
*Rimi Natsukawa (夏川 りみ Natsukawa Rimi), :Category:Japanese women pop singers
*Yuken Teruya interdisciplinary artist 
*Chikako Yamashiro filmmaker and video artist 
*Byron Fija Okinawan language practitioner and activist
*Merle Dandridge Japanese American actress and singer
*Sho Yonashiro, singer, member of JO1, a former contestant on Produce 101 Japan
*Tina Tamashiro, Fashion Model and Actress
*Jin Matsuda, singer, member of INI (Japanese boy group), a former contestant on Produce 101 Japan (season 2)
*Awich, rapper, singer and songwriter

See also
* Okinawa Prefectural Assembly
* Names of Okinawa
* :Category:Okinawan Americans
* :Category:People from Okinawa Prefecture
* Ryukyuan people
* Ryukyu independence movement
*Naval Base Okinawa

 Notes 


 References 


External links



*[http://dc-office.org/brochure/ Okinawa Prefectural Government Washington DC Office] 
*[https://www.pref.okinawa.lg.jp/ Official Okinawa Prefecture website] 
*[https://www.pref.okinawa.lg.jp/site/chijiko/kohokoryu/foreign/english/index.html Official Okinawa Prefecture website] 
*[http://rca.open.ed.jp/web_e/ Ryukyu Cultural Archives]
*[http://www.peace-museum.okinawa.jp/english/ Okinawa Prefectural Peace Memorial Museum]
*